when the university of cambridge broke ground on a museum renovation in 2017, it uncovered the remains of dozens of medieval friars. dating as far back as 1290, many skeletons still sported the weathered belt buckles—the corroded remnants of the friar burial garb. they also sported evidence of something far more insidious: the eggs of parasitic worms that potentially wreaked havoc on the friars’ intestines while they were alive.although these men lived a far more sanitary existence than the citizens in the town outside their community, they were far more likely to be riddled with parasites, a new study reveals. their gardening practices may be to blame.in medieval cambridge, many citizens subsisted in squalor, living alongside livestock in cramped cottages and dumping the household’s excrement into communal holes in the ground called cesspits. the city’s augustinian friars lived the high life by comparison. inside the friary’s walls, gardens produced fresh produce, and latrines were isolated. many friaries were even outfitted with running water systems—a luxury absent from even aristocratic households of the time—to allow the friars to wash their hands. like many aspects of their life, their focus on hygiene brought them closer to god.that may be why friars often outlived commoners. but no one had taken a hard look at whether friars were less susceptible to worms and other parasites—a common scourge of the time.so piers mitchell, a paleopathologist at cambridge, and his colleagues turned to the trove of friar skeletons that had turned up on their home turf. to determine whether the remains had been afflicted by parasites such as roundworms and whipworms—which can cause severe damage to the digestive tract and even stunt growth in extreme cases—the researchers collected sediment around the pelvises of 19 skeletons dating from the 13th and 14th centuries.as a control, they took samples from the friars’ skulls and feet, parts of the body that should lack any sign of intestinal parasites. they also collected similar samples from 25 nonmonastic skeletons interred around the same time at a rural parish around a kilometer away from the friary ruins. this parish cemetery served a predominantly lower-class congregation between the 12th to 14th century.back at the lab, the team placed the samples under the microscope to search for the remnants of intestinal interlopers. the parasitic worms themselves rotted away centuries ago. instead, the researchers sifted through the samples for microscopic worm eggs, which can persist for centuries in the sediment.nearly 60% of cambridge’s friars were riddled with intestinal worms, the team reports today in the international journal of paleopathology. they were nearly twice as likely to be infected by parasites as their nonmonastic neighbors.ironically, the friars’ better hygiene may be to blame, mitchell believes. because they collected their excrement in the latrine instead of disposing it in cesspits, the clergy may have recycled their own waste (or purchased waste from the townspeople) as manure for their vegetable gardens.roundworms lay their eggs in human feces, mitchell notes, so eggs in the gardens could easily make their way into produce and then into the friars’ stomachs. as the worms hatched and wriggled through the friars’ digestive tract, they would have caused abdominal pain and gut-wrenching bowel movements. and as the worm-infested friars retreated to the latrine block, they helped disperse the next generation of roundworm eggs into the friary’s stockpile of fresh manure.less is known about the manuring practices of lower classes in the town. but without access to latrines, they may have been less likely to utilize human excrement for their gardens.not all parasitologists are sold that the structures pocketing the friars’ pelvises are medieval worm eggs, however. karl reinhard, an archaeoparasitologist at the university of nebraska, lincoln, who studies intestinal parasites preserved in the guts of mummies, notes that many eggs the team examined lack the protective casings common in roundworms. there are many oval structures in the fungal and botanical worlds that can be parasite egg fakers in archaeological contexts.however, intestinal parasites are prevalent in medieval deposits, according to the cambridge researchers. skeletons from this period show signs of being ravaged by an assortment of tapeworms, flukes, and single-celled protozoa that cause dysentery.although the friars’ remains are centuries old, mitchell believes the take-home message of this finding is timeless: don’t be the friar that fertilizes your lettuce with your own feces.