a massive bill to bolster u.s. innovation took a big step toward becoming law this week after a bipartisan coalition of senators defeated an attempt to strip away most of its research components. the latest version of the u.s. innovation and competition act (usica) also includes new language requiring the national science foundation (nsf) and the department of energy (doe) to allocate their research dollars more evenly across the country.the 64-to-34 vote on tuesday represents a major victory for senate majority leader chuck schumer (d–ny) and president joe biden, who has repeatedly urged congress to pass legislation that would respond to china’s growing investments in many emerging technologies. but it wouldn’t have been possible without the support of 16 republicans, who bucked their leadership to back changes that would benefit universities in their states.the impetus for usica was a 2020 proposal by schumer to authorize spending $100 billion over 5 years on a new technology directorate at nsf that would help commercialize the basic research it funds. over time other research agencies were added to the mix, notably tens of billions in additional spending authority for doe’s office of science and a smaller boost for the national institute of standards and technology. legislators also attached a $52 billion subsidy for the semiconductor industry—real money, as opposed to the authorized spending levels for the science agencies—as well as numerous trade and security provisions.the senate passed usica in june 2021, with the support of 19 republicans. in february, a bill with similar goals, called america competes, passed the house of representatives, although only a single republican supported it. that triggered negotiations between the two bodies to reconcile their differences.lawmakers were close to reaching a final agreement last month when the senate’s top republican, mitch mcconnell (ky), ordered his team to stop talking with democrats. mcconnell saw the halt as a bargaining chip in his ongoing opposition to several of the biden administration’s priorities, although many republicans also objected to the spending—upward of $250 billion—authorized in the bill. mcconnell later gave his consent for schumer to move ahead with legislation dealing only with the semiconductor industry, dubbed the chips act.schumer didn’t want to abandon the bill’s array of research provisions, which included a 5-year doubling of nsf’s budget and a $20 billion investment in the new directorate as well as a $10 billion network of regional technology hubs funded by the department of commerce. but he needed at least a dozen republicans on his side to prevent mcconnell from using a filibuster to block the larger package, called chips-plus, from coming to a vote. he got them thanks to the work of his republican co-sponsor, senator todd young (in).one big selling point for the republicans was the bill’s provisions requiring greater geographic, racial, and institutional distribution of research dollars by nsf and doe’s science office. the goal remains, but the language has been changed from what the senate passed last year to address concerns by many researchers that it was too prescriptive.the earlier version of usica would have earmarked 20% of nsf’s entire $8.5 billion budget, and 20% of the $7.5 billion budget of the doe science office, to the agencies’ established program to stimulate competitive research (epscor). the program, which doles out its own grants to help states build research capacity, serves 28 jurisdictions (25 states; washington, d.c.; puerto rico; and the u.s. virgin islands) that receive minimal federal research funding.proponents said the additional funding would level the playing field for resource-strapped institutions. but many universities not in epscor states fought that provision, saying it would unfairly prevent them from competing and distort nsf’s overall research portfolio by mandating a nearly 10-fold increase in epscor’s budget, now $215 million. (doe runs a $25-million-a-year epscor program.)the new language in chips-plus retains a quota but revises how the money will be allocated. instead of giving it to epscor itself, which doles out its own grants to help states build research capacity, nsf and doe were ordered to bump up how much money flows to institutions in those states through their regular process of making competitive awards.these revisions will minimize the administrative impact on implementation … and maximize the impact of the policy change where it counts, on the actual research, says senator roger wicker (r–ms), who crafted the initial provisions.nsf would be required to raise its allocation of research dollars to institutions in epscor jurisdictions from the current level of roughly 13% to 20% by 2029. a similar 20% goal, to be met by 2025, would apply for all types of nsf scholarships and training programs. doe science programs would need to allocate at least 10% of their budget to institutions in epscor states.the bill’s language recognizes that those targets may be a stretch. both agencies are told to do so to the maximum degree possible, and if nsf falls short, the director must explain why and offer a plan to close the gap.chips-plus includes other provisions to authorize spending hundreds of millions of dollars each year for new programs aimed at building the research capacity of institutions now receiving relatively little federal funding. that list includes historically black colleges and universities and those that serve large numbers of underrepresented students, as well as predominantly white institutions that rank outside the top 100 recipients of federal research dollars.those provisions remain unchanged from what was in usica and competes, although the house bill explicitly avoided quotas out of concern that it would distort nsf’s much-admired system of making competitively awarded grants.senator maria cantwell (d–wa), who led the senate contingent negotiating the terms of the compromise legislation, defends the importance of greater geographic distribution. you don’t want there to be holes in our research enterprise, she told science the day after the vote. you never know where that next big thing, or the next bill gates, is going to come from. so, the key is to build capacity across the country.her negotiating counterpart in the house, representative eddie bernice johnson (d–tx), acknowledges that the latest version of usica doesn’t include some things house democrats wanted in the bill. compromises had to be made, says johnson, who is retiring this year after serving for 32 years. not everyone is going to get all that they originally wanted—including me. but i hope all my colleagues will come together … and get this legislation enacted into law.tuesday’s vote was not actually on the new language. rather, it was a test vote on whether the chips-plus package had enough support to move forward. a bill incorporating the actual text could move to the senate floor as early as next week. if approved, it would then go to the house for an up-or-down vote.house democrats think they have the votes to pass it and send it to biden, who has repeatedly urged congress to act quickly on what he has called the bipartisan innovation act.