whether we’ve got the flu or have had too much to drink, most of us have experienced nausea. unlike other universal sensations such as hunger and thirst, however, scientists still don’t understand the biology behind the feeling—or how to stop it. a new study in mice identifies a possible key player: specialized brain cells that communicate with the gut to turn off the feeling of nausea.it’s an elegant study, says nancy thornberry, founding ceo of kallyope, a biotechnology company focused on the interplay between the gut and the brain. further research is needed to translate the finding into antinausea therapies, says thornberry, who was not involved with the work, but the data suggest possible leads for designing new interventions.to conduct the research, chuchu zhang, a neuroscience postdoc at harvard university, and her colleagues focused on the area postrema, a tiny structure in the brainstem first linked to nausea in the 1950s. electrical stimulation of the region induces vomiting in animals.last year, zhang’s team identified two types of specialized excitatory neurons in the area postrema that induce nausea behavior in mice. rodents can’t throw up, but they curl up in discomfort when they feel nauseous. zhang and her colleagues showed the excitatory neurons in the area postrema are responsible for these behaviors by stimulating the cells.genetic sequencing of cells in the area postrema also revealed inhibitory neurons in the region, which the scientists suspected may suppress the activity of the excitatory neurons and play a role in stopping the feeling of nausea. so in the new study, zhang’s team injected mice with glucose insulinotropic peptide (gip), a gut-derived hormone that humans and other animals produce after we ingest sugar and fat. previous research in ferrets has shown gip inhibits vomiting, and zhang hypothesizes it may suppress nausea to prevent us from losing precious nutrients. she also thought it might play a role in activating nausea-inhibiting neurons.to test this hypothesis, the researchers gave mice flavored water laced with a nausea-inducing substance. the animals began to avoid the flavored water after one drink. but if the water also contained gip, the rodents were happy to drink it again. when the team bred mice that lacked inhibitory neurons in the area postrema, adding gip to the toxin-laced water made no difference: the animals continued to avoid it in the future.the findings suggest gip activates the newly identified inhibitory neurons, which in turn block the excitatory neurons in the area postrema and suppress the feeling of nausea, the team concludes this month in cell reports. although the study focuses on the role gut-secreted gip plays in suppressing nausea, zhang adds that there are probably additional factors in the body that can also activate inhibitory neurons to produce the same effect.another future research direction is elucidating the way the gut communicates with neurons in the area postrema. zhang and her colleagues did find the excitatory and inhibitory neurons in that region are connected to the gut through the vagus nerve, but how those brain cells actually listen to the gut and send instructions to the gut in turn is still unclear, zhang says.if the team’s explanation about inhibitory and excitatory nerves in the area postrema is correct, future pharmaceuticals modeled after gip could be effective antinausea drugs, thornberry says. existing antinausea medications primarily interfere with two general types of chemical receptors on brain cells, but scientists don’t understand why they work. and for some conditions, such as nausea caused by chemotherapy and morning sickness, these medications perform poorly, if at all.new medications would be particularly beneficial for cancer patients, who frequently cite nausea as a main reason they cannot adhere to treatment regimens, adds stephen liberles, the study’s senior author and a molecular neuroscientist at harvard.randy seeley, an internist who studies gastrointestinal peptides at the university of michigan, ann arbor, calls the study a nice piece of work. the fact that the authors combined multiple approaches to show that neurons in the area postrema are responsible for nausea, he says, increases the confidence that the conclusions are correct. still, charles horn, a neuroscientist who studies nerve-organ communication and side effects of cancer therapies at the university of pittsburgh, would like to see further experiments with ferrets, which can throw up and have been used in to test antinausea medications.zhang acknowledges that more research is needed before scientists fully understand nausea and how to treat it. for example, we know that we can sometimes mentally suppress nausea, she says. so it could be that the neurons are receiving inputs from higher brain regions, too.