babies don’t babble to sound cute—they’re taking their first steps on the path to learning language. now, a study shows parrot chicks do the same. although the behavior has been seen in songbirds and two mammalian species, finding it in these birds is important, experts say, as they may provide the best nonhuman model for studying how we begin to learn language.the find is exciting, says irene pepperberg, a comparative psychologist at hunter college not involved with the work. pepperberg herself discovered something like babbling in a famed african gray parrot named alex, which she studied for more than 30 years. by unearthing the same thing in another parrot species and in the wild, she says, the team has shown this ability is widespread in the birds.in this study, the scientists focused on green-rumped parrotlets (forpus passerinus)—a smaller species than alex, found from venezuela to brazil. the team investigated a population at venezuela’s hato masaguaral research center, where scientists maintain more than 100 artificial nesting boxes.like other parrots, songbirds, and humans (and a few other mammal species), parrotlets are vocal learners. they master their calls by listening and mimicking what they hear. the chicks in the new study started to babble at 21 days, according to camcorders installed in a dozen of their nests. they increased the complexity of their sounds dramatically over the next week, the scientists report today in the proceedings of the royal society b.the baby birds uttered strings of soft peeps, clicks, and grrs, but they weren’t communicating with their siblings or parents, says lead author rory eggleston, a ph.d. student at utah state university. rather, like a human infant babbling quietly in their crib, a parrotlet chick made the sounds alone (see video). indeed, most chicks started their babbling bouts when their siblings were asleep, often doing so without even opening their beaks, says eggleston, who spent hours analyzing videos of the birds.spectrographs of the chicks’ babbling bouts revealed 27 distinct calls. in that tossed salad of sounds, the scientists picked out begging, alarm, contact calls, warbling, and other calls the chicks heard from their parents and other parrotlets outside, says co-author karl berg, a behavioral ecologist at the university of texas, rio grande valley. it was quite a surprise: the nestlings know the full repertory of adult vocalizations, he adds. all these calls will be necessary for the bird’s survival as soon as it fledges, berg says.scientists have studied babbling in songbirds like zebra finches and white-crowned sparrows, as well as in sac-wing bats and marmosets. and young male zebra finches have been used for decades as models for how human infants learn language—although they don’t begin to babble until after they’ve fledged and are living on their own outside their nests. but eggleston, berg, and their colleagues say parrots are a better analog for humans because they begin to babble much earlier, while still nest-bound, and both males and females do it. what’s more, unlike the other species, both humans and parrots are lifelong vocal learners.many of these differences may be connected to the animals’ endocrine systems, the scientists argue. testosterone, a sex hormone, drives singing in songbirds. but cortisol, a stress hormone, guides the neural pathways for language in babies. the same appears to be true for vocalizing in parrots, as the researchers showed by giving small doses of corticosterone to some of the chicks. both male and female chicks that received the supplements increased their call repertoires compared with those that weren’t treated.it’s remarkable that humans and parrots—species separated by 600 million years of evolution—have so much in common, eggleston says. it’s a fascinating case of convergent evolution.