astronomers today released the first image of the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way galaxy—or at least a picture of its shadow. eight radio observatories around the globe and more than 300 scientists joined forces to image the object known as sagittarius a* (sgr a*), a feat thought impossible until just a few years ago. it’s a truly impressive accomplishment, says black hole expert roger blandford of stanford university, who is not part of the team.the team, known as the event horizon telescope (eht), in 2019 produced the first ever image of a black hole, at the center of the nearby giant galaxy m87. the m87 black hole is 1600 times more massive than sgr a*. yet the similarity of the two images—bright rings of gas trapped in death spirals around these ultimate sinkholes—shows how albert einstein’s theory of gravity, general relativity, works the same at all scales. once you get close to the black hole gravity takes over, eht team member sara issaoun of the harvard & smithsonian center for astrophysics (cfa) told a press conference in munich today. we now know that in both cases, what we see is the heart of the black hole, the point of no return, team member feryal özel of the university of arizona told a parallel press conference in washington, d.c.compared with m87, which converts swirling gas into a powerful jet thousands of light-years long, sgr a* is quiet. m87 was exciting because it was extraordinary, says cfa’s michael johnson. sgr a* is exciting because it’s common. initial analysis of the new image suggests it is even quieter than thought: only a trickle of gas makes it to the black hole, and only one part in 1000 is being converted to light, johnson says. the black hole is ravenous but inefficient. when the researchers compared the image with their vast library of simulations, it tended to match models with a spinning black hole. it’s intriguing that we may be seeing the first hints of a spinning black hole, özel says. although the black holes in the centers of galaxies have enormous masses—millions or billions of times that of the sun—their intense gravity means their outer edge, the event horizon, is tiny in galactic terms. sgr a*, which has a mass of 4 million suns, has an event horizon that is just 15 times the size of the earth-moon distance. imaging something so small from 27,000 light-years away presents a huge challenge for astronomers.the first challenge comes from clouds of dust around the galactic center, which make observations with optical telescopes impossible. radio telescopes can peer through the murk, but their long wavelengths don’t offer resolution sharp enough to spot a diminutive black hole. but the shortest radio wavelengths, of about 1 millimeter, offer better resolution and can still pierce the gloom. telescopes that observe at those wavelengths are a relatively new breed. unlike normal radio telescopes, they must be built at high-altitude sites to get above most of the moisture in earth’s atmosphere.in astronomy, the bigger the telescope, the sharper the image. astronomers calculated decades ago that it would take a telescope as big as earth to see sgr a*, even in millimeter waves. eht does the next best thing: it observes the galactic center simultaneously with telescope dishes spread across earth’s face. the eht team stores the data, and later processes it with powerful computers as if each dish was a small patch of an earth-wide telescope—a technique known as very long baseline interferometry (vlbi). each pair [of telescopes] contributes a little bit of information to the entire image, says eht team member katie bouman of the california institute of technology.by 2017, after developing techniques for processing the data and enlisting radio telescopes worldwide, the team was ready to take a shot at sgr a* and the nearby giant galaxy m87. data came from eight observatories, from hawaii to spain and from arizona to the south pole. a key addition was the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array in chile, a group of 64 dishes with the combined collecting area of an 84-meter-wide telescope. the result was the best vetted image in radio astronomy ever, says eht team member heino falcke of radboud university. in april 2019, the team released its now famous image of m87, a result chosen as science’s 2019 breakthrough of the year. it shows the event horizon’s silhouette, magnified 2.5 times by gravitational effects. some of the light in the surrounding ring was actually emitted behind the black hole, its path bent by the intense gravity so that it appears to come from the edge.getting an image for sgr a* proved to be much harder. one reason was that the telescopes were viewing it through the crowded central plane of the milky way, where electrons from ionized gases scatter the radio waves. johnson describes it as peering through frosted glass. another challenge was motion. gas moves slowly around m87’s giant black hole, taking days to orbit the event horizon. but around the much smaller sgr a*, an orbit takes anywhere from 4 minutes to 1 hour, meaning an observation lasting several hours is likely to be blurred. if an object changes in a crazy way, you can’t image it with vlbi, falcke says. the team had to develop new techniques to separate blurring from interstellar electrons and rapid motion, and to emphasize the steady part of the signal. falcke says that after 2 years scrutinizing the results, the team is confident the ring of light surrounding the black hole shadow represents reality. on top of the chaotic structure you have a stable structure, he says.the three knots visible in the image might be clumps of bright swirling gas, but özel says they could also be artifacts of observation process. we don’t trust the knots that much, she says. they tend to line up with parts of the [eht] array where we have the most telescopes.unlike for m87, the mass of sgr a* is known very precisely from studies of star orbits close to the black hole, so the eht researchers had a firm idea of how big of a ring they should see. it’s a very tight prediction, with no wiggle room, falcke says. the ring size they found was bang on, says eht team member dom pesce of cfa, giving them more confidence in the result.the eht team carried out further observing campaigns of m87 and sgr a* in 2018, 2021, and 2022. all data are in various stages of calibration and processing, pesce says. now that the tools are ready, we hope it will be faster, özel says. further observations could help researchers understand how matter moves around a black hole and is sometimes funneled into power jets. the team produced an image of m87 in 2021 showing how its light was polarized, hinting at the magnetic fields that play a key role in accretion and jet formation. the eht array has also expanded since 2017, adding new dishes in greenland, france, and the united states, with plans for another in namibia.in the future, the researchers plan to observe at a shorter wavelength—0.86 millimeters, compared with the 1.3 millimeters used so far—which will allow them to see even closer to the event horizon. another aim is to make time-lapse movies of the gas swirling around the black holes. observing m87 every 2 weeks is the first goal. later, they will try for sgr a*-the movie. we’re still in the infancy of this field, pesce says. the first baby steps.