federal research agencies strive to fund a healthy percentage of the grant applications they receive, ensuring that scientists can pursue their best ideas. a steadily rising budget is their preferred method for maintaining a robust success rate. but a fall in applications can have the same effect.a new report from the national science foundation (nsf) on its merit review system documents how falling demand has boosted success rates at the $8.5 billion research agency. released late last month, the analysis shows the annual number of applications submitted to nsf has dropped by 17% over the past decade, falling from 51,562 in 2011 to 42,723 in 2020. success rates jumped from 22% to 28% during the same period, even though the number of grants awarded increased by 8%. the rate rose even faster—from 19% to 28%—for the agency’s standard research grants.those trends are most visible in nsf’s biology directorate, where demand has tumbled by 50% over the decade and the chances of winning a grant have doubled, from 18% in 2011 to 36% in 2020. officials credit the shifts to their decisions to eliminate fixed deadlines for submitting proposals and make other tweaks to the grantsmaking process designed to ease the workload on beleaguered program officers. the geology directorate, which piloted some of the same changes but never adopted them across the board, has seen a 28% decline in the number of proposals, with success rates rising from 31% to 42%. the pattern is similar for the engineering directorate, which dropped deadlines in 2018.higher success rates please researchers and administrators. the ability of faculty to get funds for their research is the ultimate metric, and success rates tell you that, says sarah nusser, a statistician and former vice president for research at iowa state university. she says she never paid much attention to how many proposals faculty were submitting. but some policymakers wonder whether fewer cutting-edge research proposals could affect the nation’s ability to innovate.we’re not pleased that there has been the decline, says stephen willard, a biotech executive who is a member of nsf’s presidentially appointed oversight body, the national science board. we’re trying to identify the reasons, with the goal of turning it around.james olds, a neuroscientist at george mason university who led the biology directorate from 2014 to 2018, the period when the deadline rules were revised, thinks the changes helped improve the quality of proposals. life scientists are always collecting more data to test their hypotheses, he says, so i prefer to see researchers submit a proposal when it’s ready scientifically, not because of the craziness of a 5 p.m. deadline.a senior nsf official, however, isn’t sure the changes in the application process explain the overall drop in proposals. the merit review report helps identify interesting trends and this is one of them, says erika rissi of nsf’s office of integrative activities, which does the analysis each year. but the report doesn’t diagnose anything, so we don’t know why.higher education officials say many factors influence whether a researcher submits a grant, including their readiness to participate in a new solicitation or their perception of the odds of getting funded. the covid-19 pandemic, which caused massive disruptions on campus, could also play a role. (the report only covers operations through september 2020, which spans the first 6 months of the pandemic.)the trends are not uniform across the agency. the computing directorate now gets 20% more proposals than a decade ago, for example, and a 40% increase in its budget has helped it maintain a success rate of 24%. demand in physical sciences and math has been flat, and success rates have crept up from 27% to 30%. both directorates used fixed deadlines for submitting proposals during the period.nsf’s analysis also reveals large differences in the trends by gender and race/ethnicity. the number of proposals from women has declined by 12% over the decade, for example, compared with a 21% drop for men. the number of proposals from black and asian investigators has shrunk by 27% and 28%, respectively, a much steeper decline than for the overall pool.the data-rich report includes a suggestion from the science board for improving another crucial metric: the dwell time between the receipt of a proposal and notifying the applicant of a funding decision. the agency’s goal is to complete action on 75% of applications within 6 months, but the report notes it has fallen short of that target for the past 4 years.nsf might be able to do better, the board said, by funding more proposals that don’t require outside vetting. it cited the rapid awards, an nsf-wide program that makes quick-turnaround grants of up to $200,000 to study the impact of a natural disaster or a major societal upheaval like the current pandemic. nsf quadrupled the number of rapid grants in 2020 after receiving $75 million for them in the first massive federal covid-19 relief package. even so, they only made up 2.7% of all nsf research proposals that year.we’re not saying go easy on them, willard says. but this could help with dwell times. 