the red, orange, and spotted mushrooms that sprout up after it rains are doing more than adding color to the landscape. the fungi that produce them could be keeping the natural world productive and stable, according to a new study. indeed, they may be critical to the health of earth’s ecosystems, says matthias rillig, a soil ecologist at the free university berlin who was not involved with the work.there are 70,000 known kinds of fungi. these include the yeast we use to bake bread, as well as molds, lichens, mushrooms, toadstools, and puffballs. they also include a wide variety of pathogens, from those that cause athlete’s foot in humans to those that inflict billions of dollars of damage on wheat, maize, and other crops.many of these fungi live belowground, but researchers have traditionally paid little mind to them. in the past few years, however, ecologists have realized that some—such as soil fungi called mycorrhizae—form vast underground networks that connect trees and supply them with nutrients, enabling a forest to thrive.might other soil fungi be playing a similar role aboveground? to find out, manuel delgado-baquerizo, an ecosystem ecologist at the spanish national research council, teamed up with colleagues around the world who had systematically collected and analyzed local soil samples—and the fungi they contained—for different projects. in total, the team analyzed nearly 700 samples from tropical, temperate, and polar climates.using dna, delgado-baquerizo’s team identified what proportion of soil fungi at each site were pathogens, mycorrhizae, decomposers (such as mold), and fungi that live inside plant roots. the researchers also examined satellite images that showed how much photosynthesis was going on in each area—and thus, how productive the vegetation was—and how much that productivity changed over the past 2 decades. it is a clever combination of data, rillig says.a clear pattern emerged. across a wide variety of ecosystems, from grasslands to forests to deserts, the more species of decomposers, the more plant productivity stayed the same over time, delgado-baquerizo and colleagues report today in nature ecology & evolution. having a wide variety of decomposers and to a lesser extent, root fungi, also helped keep the vegetation growing even in dry spells, the authors found. this diversity might ensure that no matter how conditions change, some fungi will still be able to supply the plants above them with nutrients. their role may be greater than mycorrhizal fungi, says sarah sapsford, a fungal disease ecologist at new zealand’s ministry for primary industries who was not involved with the work. in contrast, having a wide variety of pathogens seemed to compromise the health of the aboveground ecosystem. plants grew slower and carried out less photosynthesis, productivity that helps fuel the rest of the ecosystem’s organisms. pathogens may weaken plants and make them less able to withstand climate stresses. the associations held up in every environment studied, the authors report.it is fascinating that, despite all the other variables changing from site to site, these patterns stand out, rillig says. he cautions, however, that the work doesn’t prove fungal diversity causes the stability (or the vulnerability). other factors, such as the diversity of other types of microbes in the soil, he says, could be important as well.the findings suggest promoting the diversity might be key to protecting our ecosystems as the climate warms and leads to more droughts, says marina semchenko, an ecologist at the university of tartu who was not involved with the work.no one really knows how to promote soil fungi diversity, but at the very least, by assessing that diversity we may be able to pinpoint the ecosystems that may be ‘unstable’ and less resilient to disturbance, sapsford says. it is an exciting time.