cancer biologist david sabatini, dogged by controversy since science reported last week that he was in job talks with new york university’s (nyu’s) grossman school of medicine, today withdrew from consideration for a position at the medical school. sabatini had recently been forced from jobs at the massachusetts institute of technology and the whitehead institute for biomedical research after those institutions made findings of sexual misconduct. the howard hughes medical institute also fired him last year for violating workplace policies.false, distorted, and preposterous allegations about me have intensified in the press and on social media in the wake of reports last week that new york university langone health was considering hiring me, sabatini wrote in a statement released by a spokesperson. (the grossman school of medicine, which was named in honor of its current dean in 2019, is part of the larger nyu langone health, an academic medical center with its flagship campus in manhattan.)i understand the enormous pressure this has placed on nyu langone health and do not want to distract from its important mission. i have therefore decided to withdraw my name from consideration for a faculty position there. i deeply respect nyu langone health’s mission and i appreciate the support from individuals who took the time to learn the facts. i remain steadfast in believing that the truth will ultimately emerge and that i will eventually be vindicated and able to return to my research.medical school administrators said in an email to faculty, staff, and students early this morning that the decision was a joint one: after careful and thorough consideration that included the perspectives of many stakeholders, both dr. david sabatini and nyu grossman school of medicine have reached the conclusion that it will not be possible for him to become a member of our faculty, dean robert grossman and vice dean for science dafna bar-sagi wrote.the school’s mission to save lives … compelled us to give careful reflection to hiring dr. sabatini after he initially reached out to us, the pair wrote in a statement that was also posted on twitter. we heard voices of support from many dozens of dr. sabatini’s colleagues, lab alumni, and peers. … but we also heard clearly the deep concern from our own faculty, staff, and trainees. our thorough review and deliberate approach was essential for us to make an independent evaluation consistent with our own institutional priorities.turmoil erupted at nyu after the job discussions became public last week. the university’s president disavowed the medical school’s move, whereas the medical school administration rallied to sabatini’s defense. hundreds of students, postdocs, faculty, and external scientists dissented vehemently, staging a walkout and writing protest letters.reaction to today’s news was divided. seven sabatini lab alumni who say they organized an anonymous letter of support from 45 current and prior sabatini lab members wrote to science in an email: we are saddened to hear this news. … we stand by our testimonials of a positive lab culture. we are bothered by lack of justice and seek[ing] of the truth, as well as the harshness of judgement without the facts (that we tried to share).but joseph osmundson, a clinical professor of biology at nyu, praised the outcome. i am incredibly proud of the countless trainees who spoke up about the safety of their workplace in the face of secrecy and open intimidation, he wrote in a statement to science. i hope this marks a sharp departure for our field, one that isn’t just about david sabatini. we insist on dignity in our workspaces above anything.julia derk, a neurobiologist and nyu medical school alumna who is now a postdoc at the university of colorado, denver, anschutz medical campus, said in an email that she is grateful and relieved at the news. it shows us as scientific trainees that when we organize, we can win. … i am inspired to see this chorus of concerned scientists stand up for our shared values.