fresh from a tumultuous 2020 census, the u.s. census bureau has quietly begun what it hopes will be a major overhaul of how it conducts the decennial census and manages 130 surveys that paint a statistical picture of the country.its goals are to hold down costs, reduce the burden on survey respondents, and do better at finding people from groups often undercounted. agency officials believe the changes will result in more useful and timely information about the nation’s residents and the economy.an independent team of former census directors and prominent social scientists based at the university of virginia (uva) is helping the agency meet those goals, and last week it released a progress report on its 4-year effort. the census bureau is already moving in the right direction, and we’re hoping to help them get there by exploring some of the scientific issues that need to be addressed, says sallie keller, a uva statistician leading the team along with former census director kenneth prewitt.we understand that we need to take a different approach for 2030, says robert santos, a statistician who began a 5-year term as census director in january. the agency faces ever-rising costs (the 2020 census cost $14.2 billion), declining response rates, diminished public trust in government, and heightened concerns about privacy. we’re looking to see how far we can go with the vision that has been expressed by the university of virginia team, santos says.the research community, which could gain easier access to a richer trove of data sets, is rooting for the census bureau to succeed. but many are skeptical that it can adopt meaningful improvements in today’s hyperpartisan political climate.the agency’s constitutional duty—to determine how to divvy up the 435 seats in the u.s. house of representatives by state—makes it a perennial target for politicians. the 2020 cycle was especially fraught as then-president donald trump waged an assault on the agency’s independence that included an unsuccessful campaign to add a citizenship question to the census.one major challenge for the agency is to reduce its reliance on a master list of addresses, painstakingly compiled and continuously updated, as the basis for the decennial head count. but counting every household requires an army of enumerators to make repeated follow-up visits to dwellings believed to house residents who did not respond to the initial census questionnaire.the census bureau hopes to dramatically shrink that mop-up effort in 2030 by identifying most of the u.s. population through so-called administrative records: personal information residents have already provided to other federal agencies, as well as data collected by local and state governments and by commercial vendors. the bureau could then conduct a much smaller follow-up effort to track down the estimated 15% to 20% of the population lacking a usable electronic footprint.there’s no guarantee, however, that data culled from administrative records would meet the bureau’s high standards. and enumerating people who are missing from those records is no trivial matter, says joseph hotz, a population economist at duke university.hotz is conducting a study to understand rural aging in north carolina and has found that men living alone can be especially elusive. they aren’t homeowners, and they don’t appear in commercial housing databases, he says. they aren’t easy to find because they don’t want to be found.another major goal is to make better use of data from the welter of surveys the bureau now conducts apart from the decennial census. those surveys generate separate master lists, or frames, that contain data such as the number and location of housing units, a roster of employers and jobs, and demographic information for the population as a whole.combining those frames and analyzing the merged data, santos says, might answer policy questions you couldn’t even put on the table before. it could also lead to shorter, less burdensome surveys, he adds, by eliminating redundant questions.the uva team is conducting a series of pilot studies to demonstrate the added value of what it calls a curated data enterprise. joe salvo, former chief demographer for new york city and now a senior fellow at uva, says one example of an important economic trend that current surveys have struggled to capture is the gig economy, in which people hold down multiple jobs.the bureau’s current population survey (cps), a monthly survey of the u.s. labor force, yields a gross undercount of gig workers by assuming respondents have just one primary job, salvo asserts. cps says there are 15 to 18 million people in the gig economy, and that the number hasn’t changed since 2005, he says. but recent studies suggest the number could be as high as 55 million. he thinks a better answer would come from combining cps data with internal revenue service data on reported income, along with records from nonprofit organizations and from those who are self-employed.another uva project, on the state of nursing homes and residential care facilities, aims to create a more detailed picture of those who live in, work at, and operate such facilities. keller says that picture could be pieced together from geospatial data and business and labor surveys and would be invaluable for responding to a natural disaster or pandemic.despite the potentially huge payoff, such efforts raise the specter of the federal government as an all-knowing big brother. some of those fears could be alleviated, keller says, by pooling the data only as needed, to answer a specific policy question.another safeguard is to cloak personal, individualized data. we’re very close to having the technology for creating a firewall that allows access to the data without actually being able to look at individual records, santos explains.the census bureau is already prohibited from releasing any data sets that, when combined with other anonymous information, could allow outsiders to identify individuals. to meet that requirement, the 2020 census applied a mathematical tool called differential privacy, which injects statistical noise into the data.however, many demographers have complained that the amount of noise needed to avoid disclosure has undermined data quality. they worry the problem will get worse if the census bureau sets too high a privacy bar for any data it releases. one proposed solution would be to exempt some data, such as addresses, that are typically available on the internet.privacy concerns aren’t the only reason for the decline in survey participation, social scientists say. the public is also skeptical that surveys are worth the time. it’s insufficient to tell people they are required by law to participate, santos says. we need to demonstrate tangibly how the data we’re collecting is benefiting them on a day-to-day basis.nancy potok, former chief statistician for the united states and a former deputy census director, wholeheartedly endorses what santos and the uva team are trying to accomplish. but she wonders whether the agency will be able to make headway.any big changes will make the census bureau a [political] lightning rod, she predicts. and census tries hard to avoid that fate. so in the end, i think that the status quo … is the most likely outcome.prewitt hopes otherwise and is counting on the research community to help the agency make its case for change. our challenge is to defend something that’s inherently political with something that isn’t political, he argues. and the answer is science. that’s the only thing that will carry the day.