a new report takes the u.s. department of defense (dod) to task for chronically underfunding researchers at historically black colleges and universities (hbcus) and other schools with large underrepresented student enrollments—and for failing to deliver on its repeated promises to do more.funding from dod for these institutions has remained essentially flat over the past decade despite legislation and departmental efforts with the stated intent of growing that pot, says the report, released on 28 april by the national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine (nasem). there is a clear disconnect between the expressed encouragement by congress and dod to increase participation of [minority-serving institutions] in defense-funded research and the resources allocated.dod trails other federal agencies in funding research at minority-serving institutions (msis), according to data collected by the nasem committee. hbcus received just 0.4% of the $6.6 billion dod spent on basic research in 2019, the report notes, compared with 0.9% of the research pie at the department of energy and nasa and 0.8% of all federal research dollars. the report recommends that dod meet or exceed what other agencies are doing.simply giving more research dollars to hbcus is only part of the solution, however. the report says dod officials must also find ways to level the playing field for hbcu faculty members who apply for grants.those scientists now face obstacles that include heavy teaching loads, inadequate lab space and equipment, and a dearth of administrative support for submitting proposals and complying with the terms of any awarded grants. in contrast, says richard murray, chair of the division of biology and biological engineering at the california institute of technology (caltech) and a member of the nasem panel, i have never been in a situation where adequate research infrastructure didn’t exist. hbcu faculty lacking such institutional support are at a distinct disadvantage when competing against scientists at schools like caltech, he adds.there is untapped research capacity [at hbcus] if dod wants to invest in it, murray says. but they need to figure out how to access that talent.dod also needs to collect more information on what it is doing to help hbcus and other msis and whether those efforts are succeeding, the report says. maybe its current funding is the right amount, given what those schools can do for dod, murray speculates. but the data you’d need to decide whether that’s the case isn’t available. information that dod officials provided, the report notes, was insufficient to meet the committee’s needs.the report also implicitly criticizes dod officials for having to be prodded into doing more for hbcus. this year, congress appropriated twice the $50 million that dod requested for a program targeting hbcus and msis, and committee members say they hope that amount will become a floor for future dod budget requests. the report also suggests that dod learn from efforts by other federal agencies, notably the national science foundation, to support capacity building at underserved populations.in 2020, congress ordered dod to contract with nasem to do a study, and one of its leading advocates, representative anthony brown (d–md), calls the report another step forward … [in] building a stronger, more diverse research and scientific community. a dod spokesperson says the department appreciates the [panel’s] insights … [and] is reviewing the recommendations.that review needs to translate into concrete improvements, the report emphasizes. it is time to move from well-intentioned statements to actionable outcomes, it concludes.