you know when your own heart races—whether from a tarantula on your lap or a text message from a crush. and according to a new study, monkeys do, too. for the first time, scientists have found evidence of a nonhuman animal sensing its own heartbeat—a result that might help scientists study human emotions on a cellular level.the ability to sense our inner worlds—everything from a pounding heart to a full bladder—is known as interoception. just as touch, taste, and smell help us encode sensory information about the outside world, our interoceptive senses alert us to what’s going on inside our bodies. interoception seems to ground everything in the human experience, from cognition to consciousness, says eliza bliss-moreau, a psychologist and neuroscientist at the california national primate research center who led the study. it allows us to navigate the world effectively.in recent decades, scientists have linked interoceptive sensitivity to emotional awareness and a variety of mental health conditions. people who are no good at heart rate detection, for example, are more likely to than their peers to experience major depressive disorder. by studying the physiology of interoception, scientists hope to eventually learn more about how different psychiatric disorders emerge and develop.but interoception is difficult to study, primarily because relevant brain structures such as the insular cortex are situated in no-go zones that are inaccessible without invasive surgery, says w. kyle simmons, a cognitive neuroscientist at oklahoma state university, tulsa, who was not involved in the study. so, in an effort to find an analogous system, bliss-moreau and her colleagues turned to monkeys—because previous studies hinted they may also be able to listen to their bodies.to find out, the team replicated the design of a previous study of human infants. in that experiment, scientists hooked 41 babies up to an electrocardiogram, which monitored their heart rates, and an infrared eye tracker, which traced the direction of their gaze. on a screen in front of them, the infants watched videos of bouncing shapes—yellow clouds and pink polygons. some shapes bumped between the top and bottom of the screen in sync with the babies heartbeat, whereas others bounced asynchronously—either too fast or too slow.because babies tend to pay more attention to stimuli they find surprising or out of place, they spent more time looking at the shapes bouncing out of sync with their beating hearts—indicating they’re attuned to their own cardiac metronome.when bliss-moreau and her colleagues repeated the study in four rhesus macaques (macaca mulatta), all the monkeys distinguished between the synchronous and asynchronous stimuli. the animals spent an average of 1.01 seconds looking at shapes bouncing at the same pace as their pulse, but they took an extra 0.83 and 0.68 seconds, respectively, when the shapes moved 10% faster or slower, the researchers report today in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences. those results held for 100 trials per monkey—and they closely matched rates for the human babies.this is the first solid evidence for interoception in nonhuman primates, simmons confirms. this is opening the door to some new methods that may help us understand [its] biological basis.the finding could also help bridge gaps between physiology and behavioral psychology, bliss-moreau says. now that we know monkeys use the same interoceptive cues as humans, researchers can investigate the connection between the heart and insula, for example, in creatures that are closer to humans, both behaviorally and physically. most studies on complex psychological functions are now done with rodents, which have different neural hardware and sensory-processing mechanisms from humans. although the ethical concerns of working with nonhuman primates are many, bliss-moreau stresses that scientists will learn far more from monkeys than they ever could from rats and mice.we’re really asking, ultimately, how and why emotions like we humans experience came to be, bliss-moreau says. i’m betting that it will be a monkey model that [helps us understand] the causal neural mechanisms. if researchers can trace the circuitry responsible for feelings and emotions, perhaps they can begin to predict and prevent different mental health conditions, she added.still, there are important differences between monkey and human brains—particularly in regions that underlie higher order thinking, simmons says. it’s not a perfect model. but this gets us closer to that than we’ve been before.