a federal jury today found university of kansas, lawrence, chemical engineer franklin tao guilty of lying to government officials about his ties to a chinese research institution.tao faced eight charges of wire fraud and making false statements to u.s. government agencies in connection with research grants from the department of energy and the national science foundation. he was found guilty of three charges of wire fraud and one count of making a false statement.the government argued that tao deliberately hid ties to china in reporting on the status of federal grants. specifically, it claimed he had received funding from a chinese government program to recruit foreign scientists and that he was being paid as a faculty member of fuzhou university.while we are deeply disappointed with the jury’s verdict, we believe it was clearly against the weight of the evidence, tao’s lawyer, peter zeidenberg, said shortly after the verdict was announced. given that the victim agencies all said they were fully satisfied with the work dr. tao did on their grants, we do not believe the conviction can possibly stand.tao was the first academic scientist prosecuted under the china initiative launched in november 2018 by then–attorney general jeff sessions. the controversial program was aimed at rooting out economic espionage, but only two of some two dozen academics were ever charged with such offenses. in february, assistant attorney general matthew olsen changed the initiative’s name to the strategy for countering nation-state threats, noting that it had had a chilling effect on u.s.-based scientists of chinese origin and fueled a narrative of intolerance and bias.tao’s case was just the third to go before a federal jury. in the first of those cases, a judge in september 2021 acquitted anming hu, a mechanical engineer at the university of tennessee, knoxville, of charges that he had lied to federal agencies about his ties to china. in the second, in december 2021 harvard university chemist charles lieber was found guilty of hiding his financial ties to chinese institutions in declarations to harvard university and to federal funding agencies. this week, lieber, who awaits sentencing, asked the court to overturn the verdict.in more than a dozen china initiative cases that did not go to trial, defendants have negotiated plea deals that included prison sentences of varying lengths or prosecutors have dropped charges.it is not illegal for academics working in the united states to receive foreign support. but federal rules require them to report such funding.a 51-year-old chemical engineer, tao came to the university of kansas in 2014. he has been on unpaid administrative leave since his arrest in august 2019.tao’s trial began on 22 march in a federal courtroom in kansas city, kansas. it ran for 2 weeks. zeidenberg only called two witnesses in tao’s defense—his pastor and his wife, hong peng.no date has been set for tao’s sentencing.