in a repeat of 2017, centrist french president emmanuel macron and far-right nationalist marine le pen are the leading contenders in presidential elections on 10 april. academics, who are generally left leaning, dislike le pen for her anti-immigration and isolationist views. but many scientists are also uneasy with macron, because a second term would let him pursue controversial efforts to strengthen universities at the expense of national research organizations like cnrs and inserm.macron views universities as more nimble and innovative than the national bodies, which are still the backbone of research in france. the potential danger is that the organizations will lose autonomy and become subservient to universities, says patrick monfort, a microbial ecologist at the university of montpellier and member of a researcher trade union. he worries about macron’s vision that to improve the efficiency of universities, we must give them all the resources of the research organizations.the latest opinion polls put macron at 27% of the vote, versus 21% for le pen. farleft candidate jean-luc mélenchon is polling at 15%. if no one wins an absolute majority on 10 april, the two leaders would face each other in a runoff 2 weeks later. the traditional parties are lagging behind, as in 2017. conservative candidate valérie pécresse, a former research minister, is polling at about 10%, whereas socialist candidate anne hidalgo has struggled to get any notice.although le pen’s popularity is rising, many pundits expect macron to win. that would allow him to make good on plans laid out in a 2020 science bill, which promises to raise public research spending from about €15 billion per year to €20 billion by 2030, aiming for 3% of gross domestic product. researchers welcome that goal but point out that even then, r&d spending would fall short of that of competitors such as germany. there has been a catch-up effort, but it is not sufficient, says manuel tunon de lara, president of france universités, an association of 74 universities.the law also launched a battery of measures to make french science more competitive. in its first year of implementation, the law increased funding at the national research agency, allowing it to raise the success rate for competitive grant applications to 23%, compared with 17% in 2020. university professors and permanent researchers are now guaranteed a salary of at least €3200 per month, twice the minimum wage. the law also created nearly 100 junior professor positions resembling tenure-track posts elsewhere. trade unions criticized the new positions as an attack on france’s tradition of offering permanent jobs even at entry level.macron’s efforts to reorganize french science around elite universities have sparked more unease. in march, macron earmarked €300 million per year to support education, research, and innovation at 17 university-led alliances, the first of which were launched in 2011. macron credits them with raising the international profile of select french universities and boosting france’s success at winning grants from the european research council. but bruno andreotti, a physicist at paris city university and member of the radical researcher collective rogueesr, says the initiative has led to a culture of the have and the have-nots. there is this fantasy … to have 10 cutting-edge research universities and the … others, to abandon them.even more controversial changes could come with macron’s reelection. at his first press conference as a presidential candidate on 17 march, macron declared he would make [universities] fully fledged research performers. this would require giving them full autonomy and go all the way through on reforms initiated a decade ago.he was alluding to a long-standing effort to reform a peculiarity of the french research system: the so-called mixed research units, which bring together researchers from both universities and the national research organizations. at a university congress in january, macron indicated the research organizations should merely provide support for universities. tunon de lara, who supports macron’s proposal, says the duplicated and ill-defined roles between universities and research organizations are hampering efficiency. this is an orchestra with different instruments—it cannot be a cacophony, he says. if we have an ambition of international competition … then everyone must be able to play their role.but sabrina speich, a climate scientist at the école normale supérieure who works in a mixed research unit, says they are an incredible strength of the french system, one that allows for a richness of both research and training. previous attempts by pécresse to reform the mixed research units failed. in campaign pledges, mélenchon said he would maintain the current roles of universities and research organizations. le pen has not offered a position.macron’s announcements have already met some backlash. patrick flandrin, a cnrs physicist and president of the french academy of sciences, says universities and research organizations must continue to cohabitate. the real problem is chronic underfunding, monfort says. universities are deluding themselves into believing that they would have more resources if they had more control over the mixed research units, monfort says. they would just have more power … with a constant budget.