president joe biden will get a chance to name a new head of u.s. cancer fighting efforts. norman ned sharpless, director of the $6.9 billion national cancer institute (nci) since late 2017, announced today that he will step down at the end of this month after nearly 5 years on the job.sharpless’s announcement stunned many in the cancer research community. i was surprised and disappointed, said cancer virologist harold varmus of weill cornell medicine, a former national institutes of health (nih) director who preceded sharpless as nci chief. we will miss him, says ashani weeraratna, a cancer biologist at johns hopkins university who serves on nci’s national cancer advisory board.the nci director holds a position of unusual political prominence. unlike the directors of nih’s 26 other institutes, who are selected by the nih director, the nci chief must be hand-picked by the president. and whereas other institutes’ annual budgets go through the nih director’s office, nci submits an aspirational budget proposal directly to the president.sharpless, who is 55, said it is the right time to step down for a bunch of personal and institutional reasons, including the fact that past nci directors have usually served about 5 years. that term length allows for robust change in the organization, he told scienceinsider. the fact that biden had not taken the largely symbolic move of signaling support for him by reappointing him to the nci position after he became president was not a factor, he said. i’ve had a very good relationship with this white house.observers credit sharpless with steering nci through a tumultuous period. before then-president donald trump appointed the physician, who studies aging and cancer, to lead nci in 2017, sharpless directed the university of north carolina’s lineberger comprehensive cancer center. his basic and translational research experience and moderate political leanings (sharpless had donated to democrats) came as a relief to scientists worried that trump would make an unconventional choice.his tenure was complicated, varmus says, as sharpless himself notes. in 2019, 1.5 years after his arrival at nci, he left for a 7-month period as acting chief of the u.s. food and drug administration. returning to nci just before the pandemic began in early 2020, he went on to oversee nci’s role in developing covid-19 tests and to highlight the harm from missed cancer screenings. the pandemic and fda stint made sharpless question his enthusiasm for a job that was unexpectedly challenging and demanding, he says.sharpless counts among his major accomplishments the childhood cancer data initiative, a planned 10-year, $50 million per year project proposed by trump to promote data sharing on pediatric tumors. in the wake of george floyd’s death, he pushed to address health disparities and support diversity in the cancer research workforce.he also worked to shift funding to investigator-initiated grants to bolster nci’s sagging grant success rates, which have been the among the lowest of nih’s largest institutes for years because of soaring numbers of applications from scientists new to nci. although the influx of new ideas is a good problem, it has created intense pressure on researchers, sharpless says.even with additional funding from congress, nci will miss its target of bumping up success rates again this year because of commitments to ongoing grants. that’s my largest disappointment as director, he says.sharpless will return to his family in north carolina, where his wife is an endocrinologist and his aging mother lives. he doesn’t yet have another position—federal rules made it hard to job hunt—but he expects to return to academia.varmus said it was wonderful to be succeeded [at nci] by somebody as good as ned. he credits sharpless with paying attention to all the right things.sharpless did a great job during a difficult time, says ellen sigal, founder and chair of friends of cancer, an advocacy group.ned’s vision and enthusiasm will be greatly missed, adds david tuveson, director of the cold spring harbor laboratory cancer center and president of the american association for cancer research. sharpless is leaving just as biden has reignited the cancer moonshot, the program he created in 2016 as vice president, with a new goal of halving the cancer death rate within 25 years. biden’s 2023 budget proposal gives nci no new funding for the moonshot, however. instead, nci would get a 3% cut, and nearly all of a proposed $4.3 billion increase for nih would go to a new component, the advanced research projects agency for health, for high-risk, cutting-edge projects.now, biden will have an opportunity to name the next nci director, who will face the task of shaping the institute’s role in these initiatives. the white house faces no deadline in making its pick, however, and still needs to fill the role of nih director, vacant since francis collins stepped down in december 2021. (collins is now acting white house science adviser and will have a hand in both searches.)in the meantime, nci principal deputy director douglas lowy will serve as the institute’s acting director. lowy has served in the position twice before, sharpless notes, and will do a wonderful job.