a creative effort to use former president donald trump to persuade people to get a covid-19 vaccine shot appears to have paid off. an online advertisement created by a team of political scientists and economists that featured trump recommending covid-19 shots led to increased uptake of the vaccines in u.s. counties that had low vaccination rates, concludes a new analysis.we were so thrilled, says marc hetherington, a political scientist at the university of north carolina, chapel hill, who helped create the ad and co-authored the study. how often do political scientists and economists do anything that helps the world? the answer is, like, 0% of the time.the study was catalyzed by surveys showing covid-19 vaccine hesitancy is higher in regions of the united states that voted heavily for trump in the 2020 election. this phenomenon has left many public health experts searching for public figures who might be able to persuade hesitant people to get a shot. to see whether trump might do the trick, the team of researchers from four universities conducted a survey in the summer of 2021 that asked 387 unvaccinated people who identified as republicans which of five sources they would trust most for vaccine advice.trump topped the list, the researchers report today in a working paper posted as a preprint at the national bureau of economic research. some 40% of respondents said they had a great deal of confidence in trump when it came to advice about receiving the shots. just 23% expressed confidence in their own doctor, 11% in either national institute of allergy and infectious diseases director anthony fauci or the scientific community at large, and 8% in president joe biden.next, the team created a 30-second youtube ad that featured a fox news tv interview with trump in which he recommends the vaccine, and another fox story about how he had received it himself. then they designed a study to assess its impact. usually, advertisements don’t have a clinical trial behind them, hetherington says.the researchers spent nearly $100,000 to have google ads place the youtube ad on the screens of phones, tvs, tablets, and computers in 1083 u.s. counties that had lower than 50% vaccination of adults. an additional 1085 similar counties served as a control group. the ad ran for 2 weeks in october 2021. the algorithm placed the ad based on google searches, and it turned out that the fox news channel hosted the ad more frequently than any other site. compared with control counties, an additional 104,036 people received first vaccinations in areas that observed the ad, a statistically significant difference.the cost of the intervention, the researchers note, was just under $1 per vaccinated person. by comparison, sweden paid people almost $25 to receive covid-19 vaccines, and u.s. locales that used lottery tickets as a reward spent $60 to $80 per vaccination, notes co-author steven tadelis, an economist at the university of california, berkeley. so we’re talking up to two orders of magnitude cheaper, tadelis says.the results highlight that health communication needs to come from trusted messengers and to meet people where they are, says behavioral scientist katherine milkman of the university of pennsylvania, who was not involved in the study. but milkman stresses that this strategy won’t work for everyone who has opted not to get vaccinated. i doubt there are many one-size-fits-all solutions, she says.heidi larson, who founded the vaccine confidence project and is on an advisory council of a nonprofit that provided funding for the study, says the findings are important but tied to a political moment with specific populations. politics are volatile—not unlike vaccine sentiments—and timing is everything, larson says.peter hotez, a vaccine researcher and developer at baylor college of medicine who has combatted the antivaccine movement, says the ideal time for this messaging may have already passed. while president trump’s positive advocacy on vaccines would only help, i doubt it would be game-changing, hotez says. unfortunately, the antivaccine ecosystem has gone beyond president trump and now flying the flag of ‘health freedom’ has become a dominant theme for the conservative news outlet … trump alone cannot fix this.tadelis says a finer analysis of their data did suggest trump wasn’t always persuasive. in about half the counties in which the ad was seen, support for trump was at 70% or higher in 2020. but they observed the most new vaccinations in the other half of the counties, where support for trump was less intense. that suggests even a message coming from trump had little impact on some of his most committed supporters.still, the researchers conclude, if politics characterizes one aspect of the problem, it might also point to part of a solution.