in early march, naomi owens-beek sat bundled against the cold, as her sled whizzed through the snow in the mountains of central british columbia. in her hands, she clutched precious cargo: a sedated caribou—one of 114 of a herd facing extinction.the caribou—a female belonging to the klinse-za herd—and 18 others will spend 5 months in a mountain enclosure known as the maternal pen. here, they’ll be safe from wolves, bears, and other predators as the pregnant cows give birth and begin to rear their calves. the work is part of an unusual, costly, and labor-intensive experiment led by two first nations to bring one of canada’s many dwindling caribou herds back from the brink.new research suggests it’s working. since 2013, the klinse-za herd has tripled in size.the results point to what it could take to revive the fortunes of ailing caribou elsewhere on the continent—some of the last herds of large, migratory mammals in the americas (also known as reindeer). the work is not for the faint of heart. it has included killing hundreds of wolves, expensive coddling of pregnant caribou cows, and hard-won protections for land in mountainous central british columbia covering an area larger than the state of delaware.the lesson is that it takes all the levers to recover caribou, says rob serrouya, a caribou biologist with the alberta biodiversity monitoring institute. he has worked for years on caribou recovery in british columbia but was not part of the klinse-za research.until recently, this herd had been following the same trajectory as many woodland caribou in north america: down.unlike the waves of barren-ground caribou that swarm across the arctic tundra each year, woodland caribou form smaller herds in old-growth forests and high-altitude mountain slopes, feeding chiefly on lichen. the caribou in western canada have suffered from the ripple effects of logging and oil and gas extraction. brushy habitat left by logging lures moose and deer that in turn attract wolves, whose travel is eased by roads. the wolves then prey on the caribou. since 2000, nearly one-third of the 38 herds in southwestern canada have grown so small they are considered functionally extinct, including the last one in the united states.the klinse-za story is emblematic. caribou were a staple of indigenous people’s diet and culture in the region. elders with the west moberly first nations recounted that their ancestors told them there was once a sea of caribou in the area. between the 1990s and 2013 the klinse-za herd shrank from approximately 250 animals—a number thought to be much smaller than earlier levels—to 38 in 2013. that year, the last remnant of the neighboring burnt pine herd disappeared.that extinction galvanized the west moberly and saulteau first nations, says owens-beek, manager of treaty rights and environmental protection for the saulteau first nations. we didn’t want to see a species die on our watch.the nations created a nonprofit organization and collaborated with private sector biologists to launch the maternal pen, based on a previous experiment in the yukon. it cost hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to catch and transport the caribou, build the pen, and care for the animals. native trappers and, later, sharpshooters hired by the provincial government took aim at wolves to decrease pressure from predators.to monitor the effects, scientists scrutinized the fate of the animals. each of the adult females and new calves from the pen wore radio collars to monitor their movements. every death was investigated. other females in the wild were outfitted with gps collars to track herd behavior and predation. researchers in low-flying aircraft counted overall numbers each year.the scientists plugged the data into computer models that offered a detailed look at demographic changes. to tease out the effects of the penning, they compared the trends with a neighboring herd where managers were killing wolves but not sheltering pregnant females.the results were encouraging. the scientists found that before the interventions, the klinse-za population was declining by roughly 10% each year, a recipe for extinction. the combination of killing wolves and penning pregnant females enabled the population to grow by approximately 12% every year between 2014 and 2021, the scientists and first nations representatives reported last week in two papers in ecological applications.nowhere in north america has anyone truly recovered an endangered caribou herd, says clayton lamb, a wildlife scientist at the university of british columbia, okanagan, who has been part of the herd monitoring. i think that this work will be one of the leading examples that will tell us how to do that.the researchers attributed roughly two-thirds of the improvement to the killing of 384 wolves between 2013 and 2020. the remaining third stemmed from the penning, in which 87 females were housed in enclosures of between 5 and 15 hectares. there, under the watch of first nations caretakers who patrolled the area for predators, they gave birth to a total of 65 calves. the caribou were released each summer.although the pen operation has been a success, that hasn’t been the case elsewhere, cautions mark hebblewhite, a wildlife habitat ecologist at the university of montana, missoula, who helped study the klinze-sa effort. at a pen located at a lower elevation lake in british columbia, for example, calves were killed by predators as they tried to make their way into the mountains. that project is no longer running. that’s an important caveat before we all start running around raising baby caribou and thinking that’s going to save the world.scientists credit the leadership of first nations as a critical ingredient, providing money, staffing, and political power. the only people i know, across the country, who are doing anything to really reverse caribou population declines are those two first nations, hebblewhite says.that clout could be tested in the coming years, as the first nations work to reverse the habitat decline at the root of the herd’s woes. in 2020, the two first nations reached a landmark agreement with the provincial and federal governments of canada to protect and restore nearly 8000 square kilometers of forestland, more than 85% of the klinse-za’s territory.today, the herd is still small enough that they kind of remain on these life support measures until the habitat restores to a level that will sustain them, lamb says. he estimates that could take 25 years.meanwhile, first nations members look to a day when their sea of caribou return. hopefully, owens-beek says, one day my son can harvest caribou.