the asteroid that exterminated the dinosaurs about 66 million years ago left mostly smaller creatures in its wake, from rodentlike insect eaters to beaver-size herbivores. over time, these animals got larger, some eventually becoming giants themselves. scientists have long thought their brains hitched a ride on this expansion, gradually getting bigger as the rest of the body did. but a new study suggests brains were the last things to grow, possibly because their owners needed to be smarter to survive.the new results are a really powerful demonstration that body size and brain size are regulated as two separate entities, says suzana herculano-houzel, a neuroanatomist at vanderbilt university who was not involved with the research.the mesozoic era, some 250 million to 65 million years ago, wasn’t a great time to be a mammal. most of our distant ancestors were no bigger than a shrew; they had to stay small and live fast before dinos could gobble them up. the dinosaurs kept mammals small, and the mammals kept dinosaurs big, says steve brusatte, a paleontologist at the university of edinburgh and senior author on the new study. once the dinos vanished, mammals were finally free to grow.scientists had thought that as mammals ballooned in size, their brain size also increased to keep pace with their bodies, a widely accepted idea proposed by paleoneurobiologist harry jerison in the early 1970s. but mammalian fossil skulls from the time right after the asteroid impact were very rare, so scientists have had a hard time testing this hypothesis.now, brusatte and his colleagues have analyzed 34 recently discovered mammal skulls belonging to the paleocene (65 million to 55 million years ago) and eocene (55 million to 32 million years ago) ages from the san juan basin of new mexico and the denver basin of colorado. they used computer tomography, which creates a digital 3d reconstruction of the skulls without damaging them. then, they produced digital endocasts—a model of the brain of the creatures from their hollow skulls (see video below). finally, the scientists compared the brain size of the animals with their body size, which they estimated using their teeth and bones.mammals first increased their body size immediately after the dinosaur extinction, but their brains only started to get bigger about 10 million years later, the team reports today in science.honestly, i wasn’t expecting that at all, says co-author ornella bertrand, a paleoneurologist at the university of edinburgh who led the new study. i was like, ‘ok, something is wrong. … why is your brain so small?’bertrand and brusatte think big brains only evolved when mammals needed them. at first, he says, they’re just trying to get as big as possible because there are so many more resources available—and no one is trying to kill them. but once these bigger mammals dominate, then they have to start getting smarter, because competition for food gets tough and it gets harder to survive. that’s when you start to see different mammal groups independently get big brains, he says.herculano-houzel disagrees. she says it’s not necessarily competition that triggered bigger brains in mammals, but just a good combination of plenty of food and no predatory dinos. brains are incredibly expensive in terms of energy, she notes, so once some mammals got bigger, they could eat more and would have more energy to make larger brains. if competition alone triggered the brain increase, she says, smaller mammals would have disappeared. but they never go away.the new data will help scientists put together a more holistic understanding of the brain evolution of early mammals, says felisa smith, a paleoecologist at the university of new mexico, albuquerque, who was not involved with the study. the study really does highlight the importance of ecology in evolutionary history.the 3d endocasts were detailed enough that the team of researchers could use subtle changes in the shape of the skulls to measure sensory regions of the animals’ brains, such as the neocortex (associated with intelligence) and the olfactory bulbs (important for smelling) and track how their size changed throughout time as the overall brain grew larger in the eocene age. they found mammals increased their neocortex and another brain region involved in eye movement, but decreased the size of their olfactory bulbs, suggesting brain regions related to senses important for survival were favored in the brain boom.this is a unique finding, says neuropaleontologist tim rowe of the university of texas, austin, who was not involved with the study. by looking at the shape of the brain and the development of the sensory systems, he says, scientists can start to get an idea of what environments these animals adapted to.bertrand says she and her colleagues are now looking at other structures in the mammals’ skulls, such as the inner ear, which can tell researchers about an animal’s agility and hearing range, and how these traits behaved and adapted. this gets at some of the roots of our own intelligence, our own brains, and we still have a lot to learn, brusatte says.