an experimental pain drug that may offer an alternative to opioids has shown promise in two small clinical trials for acute pain, its developer announced today. vertex pharmaceuticals’s compound, called vx-548, outperformed a placebo in phase 2 trials for two types of postsurgical pain, the company said in a press release. the results pave the way for larger trials that could lead to regulatory approval. this is a major advance in the effort to supersede opioids, says john wood, a neurobiologist at university college london who has studied the cellular channel that vx-548 targets. these results are terrific, and the side effect profile is very good. opioids are powerful pain relievers, but they can cause side effects including slowed breathing, and they come with the potential for addiction. an epidemic of overdose deaths has prompted a hunt for safer alternatives.the new trials grew out of research into sodium channels on the surface of pain-sensing neurons, which let them fire electrical signals. one such channel, called nav1.8, is crucial to relaying pain signals to the spinal cord from nerves throughout the body. people with genetic mutations that make nav1.8 hyperactive can suffer pain even in the absence of injury. but relieving pain by blocking either nav1.8 or another channel, nav1.7, has proved difficult. one issue is their structure closely resembles those of other sodium channels, which regulate vital functions in the heart, muscles, and brain. to be safe, a compound needs to target the channel of interest and not accidentally target these other, critical channels.vertex has spent years developing highly specific nav1.8-blocking drugs, but it has abandoned previous candidates before they reached pivotal phase 3 trials. one drug, known as vx-150, succeeded in three phase 2 clinical studies but never advanced to larger ones, in part because its high dose might be impractical for clinical use. we wanted to have higher potency, explains vertex chief scientific officer david altshuler.pain drugs also face challenges in demonstrating benefits over placebos, notes stephen waxman, a neuroscientist at yale school of medicine whose team has studied the role of nav1.7 and nav1.8 in pain. even people carrying the same diagnosis, like low back pain, can experience pain due to different molecular mechanisms, he notes. and those differences could affect how they respond to an experimental drug.vertex’s two new trials address that challenge by targeting pain after surgeries that create highly standardized, repeatable injuries: the removal of bunions (bunionectomy) and of excess abdominal fat (abdominoplasty). one trial enrolled 274 people preparing for a bunionectomy. they were randomized to take vx-548 at one of three doses, a placebo pill, or an approved pain pill containing the opioid hydrocodone in the days after surgery. they periodically rated their pain, and researchers calculated reductions in pain over a 48-hour period. participants getting the highest dose of vx-548 saw significantly greater pain reductions than those getting a placebo, the researchers found. the highest dose of vx-548 also outperformed a placebo in a similar study of 303 people after abdominoplasty. lower doses of the drug didn’t show statistically significant benefits in either study. and although the high-dose vx-548 groups showed greater benefits over a placebo than the hydrocodone groups in both studies, the trials were not large enough to compare the effectiveness of the two treatments. neither trial revealed any serious side events of taking vx-548.although they need to be confirmed in a larger trial, the results are extremely encouraging, says rohini kuner, a pharmacologist and pain scientist at heidelberg university. she notes that it’s still an open question whether vx-548 will be effective against chronic pain, which includes complex conditions such as diabetic nerve pain, or neuropathy, and pain caused by inflammation, for which few available treatments are effective. the good news, kuner says, is that there’s already evidence that nav1.8 plays an important role in inflammatory pain and certain types of neuropathy.vertex plans to meet with the u.s. food and drug administration to propose phase 3 trials for acute pain, which it hopes to begin later this year.