struggling with cost overruns, the department of energy (doe) has decided to build the united states’s next great particle physics experiment in two phases, officials told physicists this month. the decision means the megaproject—actually two intertwined efforts called the long-baseline neutrino facility (lbnf) and the deep underground neutrino experiment (dune)—won’t be completed to its original specs until the mid-2030s instead of late this decade, and that its already ballooning cost will increase even further.but the adjusted plan should get a slimmed version of lbnf/dune running as early as 2029, researchers say. with that timeline, the experiment still has a chance to beat a rival in japan called hyper-kamiokande (hyper-k) to a key neutrino measurement, says jim siegrist, doe’s associate director for high energy physics, who laid the plan out by video on 16 march during a community planning exercise known as the snowmass process. doe believes there is still a chance for lbnf/dune to come first, siegrist wrote in an email.physicists involved in the project suggested the change in tack, says regina rameika, a neutrino physicist at fermi national accelerator laboratory (fermilab) and co-spokesperson for the 1400-member dune collaboration. we are all on the same page about what comes first and what comes second, she says. but the stretched-out schedule presents a challenge, says inés gil-botella, a dune physicist at spain’s center for energy, environmental, and technological research. we need to work harder to reduce as much as possible any delays between phase one and phase two, she says. the revised plan makes clear that the current $3 billion cost estimate—nearly twice the original—now applies to the first phase alone.nearly massless and rarely interacting with other matter, neutrinos come in three types—electron, muon, and tau—depending on how they’re generated. one type can morph into another as the particles zip along at near–light-speed. to study those neutrino oscillations, physicists can fire a beam of muon neutrinos generated with a particle accelerator to a huge detector hundreds of kilometers away, which counts the arriving muon neutrinos—plus electron neutrinos that have appeared along the way.lbnf/dune would shoot an intense beam of muon neutrinos from fermilab to a detector 1300 kilometers away in the abandoned homestake gold mine in lead, south dakota. filled with frigid liquid argon, the novel dune detector would capture the collisions of neutrinos and atomic nuclei in unprecedented detail. besides putting physicists’ theory of neutrino oscillations to the acid test, it would search for charge-parity (cp) violation, an asymmetry between the oscillations of neutrinos and antineutrinos that could help explain how the universe created more matter than antimatter.after squabbling for a decade, u.s. physicists rallied around the experiment in 2013 in the previous snowmass. a year later, doe’s particle physics project prioritization panel (p5) named it the new flagship domestic effort. in 2015, doe embraced the p5 vision: an internationally funded experiment that would have a liquid argon detector with a target mass of at least 40,000 tons, a neutrino beam powered by a multimegawatt proton beam, and a smaller detector at fermilab to monitor the outgoing beam. it would cost less than $1.9 billion and be completed by 2028, doe estimated. but refurbishment and excavation at the mine have helped drive up the cost and delay progress.now, siegrist says the project will start smaller, with a detector in south dakota containing just two of four planned argon modules, with a combined target mass of no more than 24,000 tons. the power of the proton beam at fermilab will be limited to 1.2 megawatts, and the detector at the lab will be simpler. after completing the first phase, doe could pursue the bigger detector and better beam in an upgrade likely costing hundreds of millions of dollars.with just that first phase, lbnf/dune should be capable of measuring cp violation. but physicists with japan’s hyper-k say they’ll start to take data in 2028, a year before lbnf/dune. hyper-k will consist of a subterranean cylindrical tank 70 meters tall and filled with 260,000 tons of ultrapure water. some 40,000 phototubes will capture the distinctive flashes of light generated when neutrinos fired from the japan proton accelerator research complex in tokai, 295 kilometers to the east, interact with the water.workers in japan have already begun excavation, says matthew malek, a hyper-k physicist at the university of sheffield. given japan’s relatively conservative approach to scheduling, that date is likely to hold, he says. at this stage, there’s really no chance that dune will turn on before hyper-k, he says. but marvin marshak, a dune physicist at the university of minnesota, twin cities, won’t concede the race ahead of time. one thing i learned over the last 50-some years that i’ve been doing this is not to over-estimate your competition, he says.hyper-k and dune will also search for neutrinos from supernova explosions and signs that protons can decay. dune’s ultimate goal is to probe physicists’ model of three neutrino types with enough precision to tell whether it breaks down at some level, which could be proof of new particles and forces, gil-botella says. for technical reasons, hyper-k will struggle to do so, she says.doe has asked physicists to weigh the scientific case for the second phase in the new snowmass process and subsequent p5 prioritization, potentially giving skeptics a chance to question whether the whole project is worth the higher cost. tao han, a theorist at the university of pittsburgh who has been involved in snowmass organizing, predicts u.s. physicists will reiterate their support for it. we will have the community support to reach our final goal, he says.malek wonders whether the new plan is doe’s way of saying the first stage is all it will build. when you build something in multiple stages, the odds of getting beyond the first stage are more unlikely than likely, he says. mary bishai, a dune physicist at brookhaven national laboratory, reads things differently: jim siegrist said ‘go to snowmass and come back with a plan for the third and fourth detector modules.’ he didn’t say, ‘we’re done.’the issue comes at a time of flux for the u.s. program. fermilab, the united states’s only dedicated particle physics lab, is searching for a new director after nigel lockyer announced in september 2021 he would be stepping down—3 months before doe failed the lab in its annual performance review, citing in part the troubles with lbnf/dune. and on 31 march, siegrist, 69, will retire after 10 years leading doe’s high energy physics program. as u.s. particle physics enters rough waters, it’s unclear who will take the helm.