after a technical review, the european space agency (esa) confirmed yesterday that its mars rover, part of the exomars space mission, was ready for launch. the only problem: the rover has neither a ride to the red planet nor a landing craft to get it safely to the surface. russia was supposed to provide both, but esa suspended ties and canceled a planned launch in september after the country invaded ukraine last month. there was no real alternative, says exomars team leader thierry blancquaert of esa’s technology center in the netherlands.now, esa is studying options to keep the €1 billion mission alive. even if the agency can replace the russian technologies—and pay for them—a delay to 2028 or even 2030 is likely, blancquaert says. planetary scientists say the rover will be worth the wait. the mission will still be cutting edge even for potentially later launch windows in the next decade, says andrew coates of university college london, principal investigator of the rover’s panoramic camera.the exomars lander has not had an easy gestation. it was originally an esa-nasa collaboration, but the united states pulled out in 2012 for budgetary reasons. russia stepped in to provide a proton rocket for its launch, and a landing vehicle called kazachok. russian scientists also provided most of the instruments on kazachok, which will form a sensor station once it has landed on mars’s surface. and russia contributed two of the nine instruments for the mission’s showstopper: rosalind franklin, a rover the size of a golf cart, named after the british dna pioneer. it can drill 2 meters below the surface in search of pristine samples that may yield evidence of past life.the change in parentage caused the launch date to slip from 2018 to 2020. (launch opportunities for mars occur roughly every 2 years when the planets align.) but in early 2020, difficulties with the parachutes designed to slow descent into the martian atmosphere led to another 2-year delay. this time around, all the hardware was ready to start the launch campaign, blancquaert says. the rosalind franklin rover and kazachok are in turin, italy, ready to be shipped to russia’s spaceport in baikonur, kazakhstan. esa planners thought they had considered all possible pitfalls, including a surge in covid-19 cases, political unrest in kazakhstan, and strained relations with russia. war in europe was not on their radar. within days of russia’s invasion of ukraine, esa said a launch for exomars this year was very unlikely, and earlier this month, the agency formally suspended ties with russia. as soon as we saw this iron curtain descend again, we thought: what can we do to save exomars? blancquaert says.esa is now embarking on a 3-month study to help assess what’s possible. if relations with russia were restored swiftly, a 2024 launch is certainly possible, blancquaert says, but, if we need to change hardware, there’s no way we would be ready by 2024. as the war drags on in ukraine, a quick rapprochement looks increasingly unlikely.in that case, esa will have to replace several critical technologies. one is radioisotope heating units (rhus), small capsules of radioactive plutonium-238 that keep the rover warm during the frigid martian night. nasa has provided rhus in the past, and the united kingdom could develop some later this decade, but there are no other european providers. esa has rhus leftover from its huygens probe, which dropped to the surface of titan in 2005, but they have a lower power output than the russian ones. more would be needed, possibly leading to the ouster of an instrument, blancquaert says.another technology is retrorockets, used to take over from parachutes in the final stages of descent. esa tested some simple retrorockets in 2016 with its schiaparelli lander, which crashed in its final approach to mars because of a software error. in europe we have not yet matured this technology, blancquaert says.a 2026 launch date might be possible if esa had help. nasa has said it is in discussions with esa to see what it could provide. nasa doesn’t have a billion dollars to build esa a lander, says aerospace engineer zachary putnam of the university of illinois, urbana-champaign, who has carried out numerous nasa-sponsored studies of mars landing systems. but if esa was just looking for rhus and retrorockets, these could be provided by suppliers in the united states, he says. if esa must go it alone, however, 2028 is looking like the earliest possible launch date, blancquaert says: it gives us more time to finalize european technology.esa is relatively comfortable with other lander elements trialed by schiaparelli, such as the heat shield, parachutes, and the guidance and navigation system. the landing platform and a ramp that folds down to let the rover roll onto the surface shouldn’t be a problem, blancquaert says.esa also has a ready launch solution: its ariane 6 rocket is in the final stages of development and may be flying before the end of this year. but such rockets aren’t cheap and adapting exomars for a new launcher will cost money. keeping the spacecraft ready and fit to fly—and research teams working—also add to the expense. when the launch of nasa’s insight mars lander was delayed, it cost the agency about $150 million per year to keep it sitting in storage, putnam says. on top of that, developing a new lander for exomars could run to as much money as the rover itself, he says.meanwhile, esa is supposed to develop another rover and an orbiter, due for launch in 2027, that are part of a massive, $7 billion joint effort with nasa to bring martian rocks back to earth. as the exomars team considers its options, members will be nervously looking ahead to the november meeting of the esa council, when budgets are set and the fate of the mission will likely be decided.