the arrest of harvard university chemistry professor charles lieber on 28 january 2020 drew worldwide attention to the department of justice’s china initiative, launched in november 2018 amid concerns that china was improperly benefiting from u.s.-funded research. in a press conference announcing the arrest, then–u.s. attorney for massachusetts andrew lelling declared that lieber, chair of harvard’s chemistry department at the time and celebrated for his research on nanomaterials, had contributed to the ongoing threat posed by chinese economic espionage and research theft in the united states.but lieber was never charged with espionage or theft of intellectual property—two of the concerns driving the china initiative. instead, when lieber’s trial begins on 14 december in a boston federal courtroom, prosecutors will try to persuade a jury that lieber lied to federal funding agencies about his affiliation with one chinese university and failed to report income to federal tax and banking authorities.lieber is one of 23 u.s. academics, most of them of chinese descent, who have been targeted under the initiative. (federal investigators have also pursued dozens of scientists working in industry.) and the government’s track record in those cases is mixed.in the past 2 years, eight academic scientists have received prison sentences of up to 37 months after choosing to avoid a trial by pleading guilty to various charges, mostly involving failure to disclose financial ties to chinese institutions. only two, a husband and wife at nationwide children’s hospital in columbus, ohio, were charged with stealing trade secrets. last summer, the government dropped its prosecution of seven scientists, six of whom faced charges of violating u.s. immigration law, and its case against one scientist who returned to china before his indictment is unlikely to move forward.significantly, prosecutors failed to win the first case that went to trial: on 9 september, a federal judge acquitted mechanical engineer anming hu, a former tenured professor at the university of tennessee, knoxville. hu was facing charges of failing to disclose information about his links to a chinese university to nasa, which funded his work. (hu is weighing a reinstatement offer from his university, which had fired him.)now, court watchers are waiting to see how prosecutors fare against six other researchers who have elected to go to trial (see chart, below), with lieber’s case the next in line. the trial comes amid growing calls from university faculty, democratic lawmakers, and other groups for u.s. attorney general merrick garland to end the china initiative or at least curtail its scope.these six academics are preparing to defend themselves in courtcritics say the government shouldn’t be seeking criminal felony convictions against scientists who may have done nothing more than fail to properly document all their sources of research support—errors that might typically draw only civil or administrative penalties. lacking evidence of more serious wrongdoing, [lieber] has become the target of a tragically misguided government campaign [that has] criminalized them, wrote some 40 of lieber’s colleagues, including seven nobel laureates, in a march letter asking the government to dismiss the case and end the initiative.the six charges against lieber are linked to his interactions with the wuhan university of technology (wut). in late 2011, according to the indictment, lieber agreed to become a strategic scientist at wut and to lead a newly created wut-harvard joint nano key laboratory there. several months later, according to the government, lieber agreed to join a prestigious chinese foreign talent recruitment program. together, prosecutors say, the new positions provided him with a monthly salary of up to $50,000, $150,000 in living expenses, and $1.74 million over 3 years in research funding.in most instances, it is not illegal for academics working in the united states to receive foreign support. in lieber’s case, however, the government alleges he violated federal rules requiring him to report such arrangements to two of his funding agencies, the department of defense (dod) and the national institutes of health (nih). harvard didn’t learn about the deals until 2015, the government says. (an institution, not an individual scientist, is officially the recipient of a federal grant and must certify that all the terms of an award have been met.)in april 2018, according to the government, lieber told dod he had never been asked to participate in the foreign talents program. several months later, prosecutors say harvard told nih that dr. lieber has represented that he is not and has never been a participant in a chinese-sponsored talents program. the government says both assertions were false.lieber has pleaded not guilty to all the charges and his lawyers declined to comment on the accusations. we will do our talking in the courtroom, says marc mukasey of mukasey frenchman llp, a new york city law firm. (harvard has refused to pay for lieber’s defense, saying he violated his contract by not fully disclosing his wut ties. in a separate case, lieber has taken harvard to court in hopes of compelling its support.)in the run-up to his trial, lieber’s defense team has been largely unsuccessful in attacking the government’s case. for example, u.s. district court judge rya zobel, who will oversee the trial, denied a request to suppress statements from lieber’s 3-hour interrogation on the morning of his arrest, ruling that lieber had not been coerced. a different judge threw out lieber’s request that the government explain what it means to participate in a foreign talents program.for lieber to be found guilty of lying to dod and nih, the prosecution must prove he knew his statements were false and that the information was germane to his grants from those agencies. in anming hu’s case, u.s. district judge thomas varlan found hu hadn’t intentionally misled nasa. varlan also said noted university officials had assured hu that nasa rules on working with china didn’t apply to his research project and found that nasa had gotten the research it paid for, rejecting the government’s argument that hu had defrauded the agency.the tax and banking charges against lieber—which were added several months after his arrest—are less open to interpretation. you either check the box or you don’t on the relevant paperwork, said one lawyer familiar with the case who requested anonymity. the lawyer speculates that the government added the charges to induce lieber to negotiate a plea deal (which can happen at any time). you don’t always criminalize [those banking violations], the attorney says, but it increases the pressure on a defendant to plead guilty to something.it’s not clear what impact the outcome of the lieber trial, guilty or not guilty, will have on the other upcoming china initiative defendants, given the different circumstances and mix of charges in each case. but the trials do share one characteristic: their staggering expense.several defendants have launched fundraising campaigns to cover legal fees that could approach or exceed $1 million, with varying degrees of success. just one defendant, massachusetts institute of technology engineering professor gang chen, has an employer willing to pay for his defense. and chen and lieber are the only two of the six still receiving a salary from their universities. two tenured faculty members were fired in the wake of their arrests, and two others were suspended without pay while their cases proceed.