ets1 regulates tissue-remodeling properties of specific fibroblast subtypes in the synovium, gut and cancer and thus emerges as a novel cross-tissue therapeutic target for modulation of pathogenic fibroblast activation.you have full access to this article via your institution.therapeutic options for patients with rheumatoid arthritis (ra) have improved substantially over the past decade. nevertheless, joint destruction remains a major problem in those with refractory, difficult-to-treat ra, in which inflammation cannot therapeutically be controlled and joints are progressively destroyed. refractory ra has recently been associated with a pauci-immune, fibroid pathotype of synovial inflammation1. this pathotype is characterized by the absence of invading myeloid or lymphoid cell populations in the synovium and by a molecular signature suggestive of activated fibroblasts. activation of synovial fibroblasts (sfs) has long been known to play a critical role in joint inflammation and destruction, but has attracted considerable attention more recently because of the discovery of pathogenic subpopulations of sfs in the synovium through single-cell analysis. in this issue of nature immunology, the group of hiroshi takayanagi presents data that identify the transcription factor ets1 as a key driver in the formation of the joint-damaging synovial lining subtype of sfs in patients with ra2.yan et al. show that ets1 binds to a conserved, cell-type-specific enhancer element that promotes the expression of tnfsf11 (which encodes rankl) in sfs under inflammatory, but not physiological, conditions2. furthermore, ets1 transcriptionally regulates several other factors known to mediate joint destruction, such as the matrix metalloproteinases mmp3 and mmp13, in sfs. expression and dna-binding capacity of ets1 were elevated by pro-inflammatory cytokines and correlated with the expression of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-2 (hif-2), for which the authors identified binding sites in the ets1-expression-regulated enhancers. indeed, hif-2 has been previously shown to be upregulated in lining ra sfs by inflammatory cytokines and to induce the production of rankl and mmp in sfs3, but the mediator of this response was unknown. additionally, upregulation of ets1 expression might be genetically driven, as genetic variations of ets1 are associated with various chronic inflammatory diseases including ra4, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis5 and affect active enhancers in sfs6. intriguingly, yan et al. found that ets1 was also highly expressed in wnt5b+ tissue-remodeling fibroblasts in the gut2. deletion of ets1 in intestinal fibroblasts resulted in defects in mucosal remodeling and increased thickness of submucosa and muscularis propria in the colons of mice with dextran sulfate sodium (dss)-induced colitis. moreover, the authors found high expression of ets1 in cancer-associated fibroblasts, where increased levels of ets1 were associated with stromal invasion, advanced cancer stages and poor prognosis. thus, ets1 emerged as a critical regulator of inflammation-induced tissue-remodeling properties of fibroblasts across organs and diseases.fibroblasts have active roles in various physiological and pathological tissue processes, such as tissue remodeling, destruction and fibrosis. recent single-cell studies demonstrated several cross-tissue-conserved as well as organ-specific subtypes of fibroblasts, underscoring the functional diversity of fibroblasts. however, the induction, stability and function of the various fibroblast subpopulations still remain largely unresolved. in the synovium, transfer experiments with sorted lining and sublining fibroblasts in mice with experimentally induced mouse arthritis have shown that lining fibroblast populations (cd90–) mediate cartilage and bone destruction, whereas sublining fibroblast populations (cd90+) drive inflammation7. one cd90+, inflammatory sublining population that is expanded in ra is induced by cross-talk between endothelium and fibroblasts via notch signaling8. inhibiting notch could therefore be a new therapeutic strategy to suppress the inflammatory side of stromal activation in ra. similarly, knowledge of factors that induce and stabilize the destructive, cd90– sf subpopulation, such as ets1, may facilitate therapeutic inhibition of the erosive properties of sfs.one of the molecules found to be regulated by ets1, rankl, is considered a major contributor to the development of bone erosions in ra. in the synovium, rankl is produced mainly by sfs and activates osteoclastogenesis9. accordingly, the anti-rankl antibody denosumab is effective in preventing bone erosions in patients with ra, but has no beneficial impact on cartilage destruction10. cartilage destruction is likely driven primarily by matrix metalloproteinase (mmp) production by sfs. however, therapeutic inhibition of mmps has been hampered by the poor specificity and high toxicity of mmp inhibitors tested to date. therapeutic inhibition of upstream pathways of rankl and mmp production in sfs by ets1 blockade potentially kills these two birds with one stone and might provide a broader approach for preventing cartilage and bone erosion in ra.a prerequisite for the development of new, targeted fibroblast therapy options is a thorough comprehension of the roles of the various fibroblast subtypes in different tissues and diseases. the identification of similar, pathogenic fibroblast populations in different tissues opens up the possibility of targeting a fibroblast-specific signaling pathway in different diseases, such as arthritis and cancer, and also to combat different symptoms of a disease, such as intestinal involvement in patients with arthritis. a recent study integrated fibroblast signals from single-cell analysis of salivary gland, lung, intestine and synovium11. interestingly, through a cross-tissue integrative analysis, the authors identified four fibroblast subclusters that were most similar to prg4+ cd90– synovial lining fibroblasts as well as wnt5b+ crypt-top, villus-associated intestinal fibroblasts, corroborating the similarity between the tissue-remodeling synovial and intestinal fibroblast subtypes. curiously, they found no similarity between these tissue-remodeling synovial and intestinal fibroblasts and fibroblast subtypes of the lung or salivary gland11, suggesting that there are alternative factors controlling pathogenic tissue remodeling in the lung and the salivary glands.previously, a role of the ets family member spi1/pu.1 in the expression of a pathogenic, pro-fibrotic fibroblast phenotype was suggested in lung, skin and liver12. pu.1 overexpression induced the production of collagen, α-smooth muscle actin and f-actin. further comparison of skin fibroblasts and sfs showed that pu.1 expression was inhibited by high levels of the microrna mir-155 in sfs but not in pu.1-expressing skin fibroblasts. coexpression analysis by yan et al. now reveal that fibroblasts express either pu.1 or ets1, but are unlikely to express both factors together2. thus, it might be translational and post-translational control of pu.1 and ets1 that directs the fate of a fibroblast toward an extracellular-matrix-producing or -degrading phenotype (fig. 1). indeed, deletion of ets1 had detrimental effects in a mouse model of liver fibrosis13. it is thus reasonable to assume that there is a dichotomy between an ets1-driven destructive and a pu.1 fibrotic fibroblast response. the fibrotic response is initiated by transforming growth factor-β (tgf-β) in mir-155lopu.1hi fibroblasts, whereas the destructive response might be driven by a pro-inflammatory environment, with upregulation of ets1 and increased mir-155 levels to keep pu.1 in check. it remains to be determined which mechanisms silence ets1 expression in pu.1-expressing cells and whether this knowledge could be used to find a therapeutic target to block ets1 or, alternatively, release ets1 expression in fibrotic fibroblasts to resolve fibrosis.a, high ets1 expression has been found in comparable fibroblast populations in the joints, in association with cancer and in the intestine. they have tissue-remodeling properties induced by a pro-inflammatory environment. in ra synovium, ets1 expression promotes erosion through expression of matrix metalloproteinases and rankl in lining fibroblasts, whereas notch signaling initiated by endothelial cells promotes fibroblast-triggered inflammation in the sublining. high levels of the microrna mir-155 prevents pu.1 expression in sfs. b, high pu.1 expression promotes fibrosis in skin, lung and liver.although the study by yan et al. elegantly demonstrated how inflammation-induced ets1 activation can promote invasive behavior of sfs2, it cannot explain why sfs do not exhibit similar invasive behavior in all inflammatory joint diseases. additional disease-specific factors such as genetic risk factors, epigenetic activation or even activation of fibroblasts by autoantibodies may play a role. anti-citrulline-peptide autoantibodies (acpa) are capable of influencing sf behavior14. moreover, ra sfs retain their invasive phenotype over multiple passages in cell culture without further stimulation. it is possible that repeated stimulation of ets1 signaling together with a susceptible genetic background leads to an epigenetic imprinting that makes activation of this invasive pathway independent of the inflammatory environment. recently, complement c3/c3a was shown to participate in such inflammation-induced fibroblast priming in arthritis15. further studies in this direction may be helpful to identify disease-specific causal factors for joint destruction in ra, maybe even upstream of ets1 activation.ra, like many others, is a heterogeneous disease. it is unlikely that there will ever be a therapeutic ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution for all individuals with ra. studies such as the current one by yan et al.2 that dissect cellular and molecular pathways activated in ra and other diseases are needed to develop novel targeted therapeutics. ideally, in the future, we will have a choice of drugs that can specifically target signaling pathways and activated cell populations across diseases and organs, and that can be combined according to patients’ needs, regardless of the underlying diagnosis. the more we know about the underlying mechanisms involved in the pathological activation of specific cell types and cell populations, the closer we come to individualized therapy and precision medicine.rivellese, f. et al. nat. med. 28, 1256–1268 (2022).cas article google scholar yan, m. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01285-0 (2022).article pubmed google scholar ryu, j. h. et al. plos biol. 12, e1001881 (2014).article google scholar okada, y. et al. nature 506, 376–381 (2014).cas article google scholar ellinghaus, d. et al. nat. genet. 48, 510–518 (2016).cas article google scholar ge, x. et al. genome biol. 22, 247 (2021).cas article google scholar croft, a. p. et al. nature 570, 246–251 (2019).cas article google scholar wei, k. et al. nature 582, 259–264 (2020).cas article google scholar danks, l. et al. ann. rheum. dis. 75, 1187–1195 (2016).cas article google scholar takeuchi, t. et al. ann. rheum. dis. 78, 899–907 (2019).cas article google scholar korsunsky, i. et al. med (ny) 3, 481–518 e414 (2022).cas google scholar wohlfahrt, t. et al. nature 566, 344–349 (2019).cas article google scholar liu, x. et al. gastroenterology 158, 1728–1744 e1714 (2020).cas article google scholar sun, m. et al. ann. rheum. dis. 78, 1621–1631 (2019).cas article google scholar friscic, j. et al. immunity 54, 1002–1021 e1010 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencescenter of experimental rheumatology, department of rheumatology, university hospital of zurich, university of zurich, zurich, switzerlandcaroline ospeltyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to caroline ospelt.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsospelt, c. a common activator of tissue-remodeling fibroblasts across tissues. nat immunol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01294-zdownload citationpublished: 25 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01294-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 