mass spectrometry imaging holds promise for mapping the intricate organization of metabolism in complex tissues. wang et al. combine this exciting technique with metabolic tracing ex vivo to uncover metabolic specialization and adaptation in the mouse kidney.you have full access to this article via your institution.cellular metabolism is increasingly appreciated to be cell-type-specific. besides metabolic differences between organs, distinct cell types within each body tissue can specialize in particular metabolic tasks. for example, within the kidney, cells in the cortex have long been known to perform gluconeogenesis and generate atp mainly from respiration1, while the medulla is considered to rely on glycolysis2. yet, in contrast to the rapid development of single-cell transcriptomics, there are still few methods for resolving the metabolism of fine anatomical structures and cell populations. in this issue of nature metabolism, wang et al3. tackle this problem using carbon-13 (13c) metabolic tracing in combination with mass spectrometry imaging (msi) to spatially resolve metabolic pathway activity in mouse kidney tissue cultured ex vivo. this technique provided metabolic information at high resolution, recovering known regional differences in glucose metabolism, and also revealed distinct metabolism among kidney cell populations in response to ischemic injury.msi has recently emerged as a promising tool for measuring metabolites with spatial resolution. msi works by scanning a surface with an ionizing beam and analysing the resulting metabolite ions with a mass spectrometer to construct images where each pixel depicts the relative amount of a metabolite of interest at that location4. when combined with microscopy to localize cell types of interest, metabolite levels can be analysed across anatomical regions, cell populations or even single cells5. however, msi requires extremely sensitive detection: with typical metabolite concentrations ranging from 10–6 to 10–3 m, a 10 μm pixel may contain as little as 10–18 mol. although instrumentation has evolved rapidly, greatly increasing sensitivity and spatial resolution, the technique remains challenging. furthermore, measuring metabolite abundance is not sufficient to determine activity of metabolic pathways as, in general, metabolites can be produced or consumed by multiple reactions. to assess metabolic activity, metabolic tracing using isotope-labelled substrates is necessary6. pioneering studies demonstrate that 13c tracing in vivo can be combined with msi to reveal metabolic activity7,8,9, but technical difficulties remain. besides the increased complexity of mass spectra caused by 13c isotopes, achieving sufficient 13c labelling in vivo can be difficult since substantial amounts of 13c substances must be infused into the bloodstream, which can by itself disturb metabolism10.to address these problems, wang et al. took a different route, performing 13c-labelling experiments ex vivo in cultured tissue slices sectioned from mouse kidney using a vibratome (fig. 1). in this system, the authors introduced multiple 13c substrates in parallel and imaged the resulting 13c-labelled metabolic products at multiple time points using msi. this approach results in substantial 13c enrichment, making 13c-labelled metabolites easier to detect. to identify anatomical regions and cell types, the authors used an innovative combination of established marker proteins and membrane lipid signatures. the latter are conveniently available from the msi data itself, and were demonstrated to be specific for kidney cell types of interest. to integrate information from the multiple 13c-tracing experiments and time points, the seurat method was adopted to merge all information at each tissue location (pixel), using the membrane lipid profiles as ‘anchors’. in this study, msi was performed at 5 μm pixel size, approaching single-cell resolution; however, due to difficulties with distinguishing individual cells, all data analysis was done on pixels rather than single cells. nevertheless, the results reveal a landscape of metabolic specialization across cell populations at a remarkable level of detail.a, freshly isolated tissue slices are incubated in media containing selected 13c substrates, in parallel experiments. b, msi ionizes molecules at defined locations (arrow) and measures relative metabolite abundance. c, following msi, microscopy imaging of the same tissue slice is used to define anatomical structures or cell populations. d, analysis of msi data yields relative abundance of 13c mass isotopomers such as 13c3 lactate at each pixel. e, combining msi data with microscopy allows pixels to be assigned to cell populations and assessment of differences in metabolism. in this hypothetical example of slices cultured on 13c6 glucose, high 13c3 lactate (grey) in region 1 suggests active glycolysis (bold arrows), while 12c lactate (unlabelled; white) in region 2 is likely derived from other sources.reassuringly, wang et al. observed that 13c lactate derived from13c glucose was highest in the outer stripe of the medulla, which is known to be highly glycolytic2. to test their methodology in a disease model setting, the authors investigated a mouse model of ischemic injury, where blood flow to the kidney was temporarily stopped using a clamp. after a recovery period, kidney slices were studied ex vivo by 13c tracing and msi. using established markers of tissue repair, the authors found altered 13c enrichment of tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle intermediates in a population of cells that failed to repair normally. for example, 13c enrichment was reduced when using 13c glutamine as a substrate, indicating lower glutamine contribution to tca cycle oxidation in this specific cell population and suggesting altered fuel usage in this disease state. however, it should be kept in mind that interpreting such 13c-labelling patterns in terms of metabolic fluxes is complicated, and will eventually require systematic analysis based on atom-level metabolic network models, which have long been used for metabolic flux analysis in bulk material11. adapting such methods to 13c msi data would offer exciting prospects for measuring metabolism with exquisite resolution.a great advantage with the approach proposed by wang et al. is that it can directly be applied to human tissues. performing in vivo tracing in humans is difficult and exceedingly costly due to the large amounts of 13c substrates required. the ex vivo culture approach is economical, yields sufficient material to explore multiple tracers and time points, and provides opportunities for experimenting with nutrient levels, enzyme inhibitors and other drugs to better understand metabolic mechanisms. certainly, the approach also has its downsides: slicing tissues can lead to inflammatory responses;12 oxygen and nutrient perfusion must be carefully monitored; and, as always with culture models, medium composition can strongly influence the results13. nevertheless, the approach of wang et al. pushes the envelope of metabolic tracing and is likely to prove an important tool for translating metabolism research to clinical practice.weidemann, m. j. & krebs, h. a. biochem. j. 112, 149–166 (1969).cas article google scholar kean, e. l. et al. biochim. biophys. acta 54, 474–478 (1961).cas article google scholar wang, g. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00615-8 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar buchberger, a. r. et al. anal. chem. 90, 240–265 (2018).cas article google scholar gilmore, i. s., heiles, s. & pieterse, c. l. annu. rev. anal. chem. 12, 201–224 (2019).cas article google scholar jang, c., chen, l. & rabinowitz, j. d. cell 173, 822–837 (2018).cas article google scholar sugiura, y. et al. sci. rep. 6, 32361 (2016).cas article google scholar arts, m. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 56, 7146–7150 (2017).cas article google scholar wang, l. et al. nat. methods 19, 223–230 (2022).cas article google scholar grima-reyes, m. et al. molec. metab. 53, 101294 (2021).cas article google scholar antoniewicz, m. r. exp. mol. med. 50, 1–13 (2018).cas article google scholar bigaeva, e. et al. arch. toxicol. 93, 3549–3583 (2019).cas article google scholar cantor, j. r. et al. cell 169, 258–272 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencescardiovascular medicine unit, department of medicine, karolinska institutet, stockholm, swedenroland nilssondivision of cardiovascular medicine, karolinska university hospital, stockholm, swedenroland nilssoncenter for molecular medicine, karolinska institutet, stockholm, swedenroland nilssonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to roland nilsson.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsnilsson, r. zooming in on kidney metabolism. nat metab (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00621-wdownload citationpublished: 25 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00621-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 