periodic nanostructures create brilliant colours, termed structural colouration, through light scattering and refraction. now, using a simple and scalable method, stress- and strain-induced dynamic colour shifts are realized in stretchable polymers.you have full access to this article via your institution.commonly, colours seen in everyday life originate when the intrinsic colouration of a given material is reflected by specific wavelengths of light. by contrast, the natural world can also create colouration by the scattering and refraction of light through periodic structures with similar length scales to the wavelength of visible light (approximately from 380 nm to 700 nm). for example, the unique nanostructures in the wings of morpho butterflies1 and peacocks make splendid colouration, to attract females or to terrify natural enemies, that is difficult to obtain with ordinary dyes. more interestingly, some species in the natural world can also dynamically change their structural colours. after a long period of evolution, chameleons2 and cuttlefish3 have adopted dynamic structural colouration to avoid predator threats. they can shift colouration by actively tuning the lattice of the nanostructure inside the dermal iridophores.a variety of studies have been carried out to realize artificial structurally coloured materials over the past few decades, but most studies have been limited to ‘static’ colouration where the structure and colour cannot shift4. in addition, the processes used to realize such structural colouration, such as electron beam lithography and laser interference lithography, are typically constrained in terms of high process time and cost for a very limited size5. only recently, studies to realize a ‘dynamic’ colour change have been conducted by several groups6. however, in the case of dynamic colour change through structural colouration, researchers still face limitations owing to the high cost and complexity of the fabrication processes, as well as the very limited scalability. now, writing in nature materials, miller and colleagues7 address these practical problems with a surprisingly simple and highly scalable method for achieving dynamic structural colouration based on periodic crosslinking of a stretchable photopolymer with an ordinary desktop projector (fig. 1a).a, miller and colleagues have shown stretchable photonic materials with a periodic nanostructure inside7. the colour patterns of photonic materials can be shifted by stress- and strain-induced changes in the periodicity of the nanostructures. b, the authors fabricated a periodic nanostructure in a photopolymer by incorporating reflectors to create standing waves. the standing light wave partially cured the photopolymer to form periodic refractive index variation. c, structural colour can be shifted under strain through a change in periodicity in the nanostructure. panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 7, springer nature ltd.miller and colleagues put a reflector (a mirror) against the photo-crosslinkable polymer to reflect the incident light of a commercial beam projector and form a standing light wave. then, the standing wave causes a chemical reaction inside the photopolymer to form periodic refractive index variation through partial crosslinking (fig. 1b). photopolymers processed by the beam projector are laminated with commercial silicone elastomer for an absorbing layer and mechanical support. the method reported by the authors is capable of fabricating a precise periodic nanostructure in a 6 × 8-inch sheet with micrometre-scale lateral spatial resolution.before this work, most dynamic structural colouration techniques have faced trade-offs between scalability and precise structure control. for high scalability, a number of methods to form opaline structures in a deformable sheet were shown, but they could not provide uniformity8. block copolymer self-assembly and laser interference lithography on the deformable polymer can provide precise structuring but suffer from high cost and limited scalability9. above all, the studies so far had difficulties in controlling the spatial nanostructure and the following optical properties. miller and colleagues have resolved these practical issues in a simple and cost-effective manner by producing large-area, structurally coloured sheets with a rich and easily controlled design space of colour patterns, spectral properties, angular scattering characteristics and responses to mechanical stimuli.spatial structural colours are generated through the colour distribution of the projected image by locally defining the periodic refractive index variations. primary colours (red, green and blue) showed high peak reflectivity of up to 90% of incident light. secondary colours and shades of grey were easily obtained by superpositioning primary colours like the rgb display. defined colour patterns can be shifted by stress- and strain-induced changes in the periodicity of the nanostructures in the depth direction (fig. 1c). the authors also carried out a series of solid experiments and modelling studies to understand the physics of the dynamic colouration. stress- and strain-induced structure changes were rigorously predicted from the mechanical properties (deformability of photopolymer, the topography of backing layer and texture of reflector) of the involved materials.in addition, miller and colleagues demonstrate simple applications that provide information on mechanical forces through colour change without requiring complex sensor systems. using medical fabric bands integrated with the elastic photopolymer photonic film, intuitive judgement of a patient’s condition is possible by revealing the expansion or contraction of the patient’s body in colour change without external electrical medical devices. furthermore, by combining simple imaging units such as smartphone cameras, the authors quantitatively mapped the stress distribution without a complex pressure-sensor array.although the authors mainly focused on the optical properties of polymer sheets, the value of the authors’ work is not limited to the colouration of the stretchable polymer; the approach offers scientists exciting possibilities towards controlling other physical properties (for example, electrical, mechanical and thermal properties) through structure modification.moreover, it is meaningful that the authors have solved both precise structure control and mass production of photonic materials at the same time with a simple process, which is a valuable step towards making photonic materials more practical.despite the bright potential, various weaknesses and challenges remain. for instance, currently, the process relies on imprinting the photonic structure on photopolymers, where practical issues related to creep and material fatigue during prolonged use and thermal degradation at elevated temperatures will need to be resolved in the future. also, the developed process is currently limited to a specific combination of photo-responsive polymers, adapting this process to enable structural colour imprinting for universal materials combinations would be a crucial next step. furthermore, structural colours will be considerably affected by various external factors, including environmental light sources, the viewing angle and people’s eyesight condition, which may result in misinterpretation of information. therefore, it still might be difficult to apply this technology directly to a specific field that needs exact quantitative information with high accuracy and reliability. further investigation will offer solutions to resolve these limitations and also provide opportunities in related research fields that can take another leap by using this technology.kinoshita, s., yoshioka, s. & miyazaki, j. rep. prog. phys. 71, 076401 (2008).article google scholar teyssier, j., saenko, s. v., marel, d. & milinkovitch, m. c. nat. commun. 6, 6368 (2015).cas article google scholar deravi, l. f. et al. j. r. soc. interface 11, 20130942 (2014).article google scholar ito, m. m. et al. nature 570, 363–367 (2019).cas article google scholar rezaei, s. d., ho, j., wang, t., ramakrishna, s. & yang, j. k. w. nano lett. 20, 4422–4429 (2020).article google scholar kim, h. et al. nat. commun. 12, 4658 (2021).cas article google scholar miller, b., liu, h. & kolle, m. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01318-x (2022).article google scholar arsenault, a. c. et al. nat. mater. 5, 179–184 (2006).cas article google scholar chan, e. p., walish, j. j., thomas, e. l. & stafford, c. m. adv. mater. 23, 4702–4706 (2011).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of mechanical engineering, seoul national university, seoul, south koreadaeyeon won & seung hwan koinstitute of engineering research, seoul national university, seoul, south koreaseung hwan koyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to seung hwan ko.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionswon, d., ko, s.h. the colour of stress. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01337-8download citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01337-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 