what links the spread of a forest fire and the condensed state of quasiparticles called exciton–polaritons — tiny hybrid objects made of light and matter that are found in semiconductors1? fontaine et al.2 answer this question in a paper in nature with experiments showing that a property of the wave-like nature of the quasiparticles in the condensate behaves just like an interface: it is governed by a mathematical expression, known as the kardar–parisi–zhang (kpz) equation3, that describes interfaces ranging from wildfire fronts to the growth of a bacterial colony (fig. 1). the results suggest that a versatile quantum-optical platform could be used to explore this far-reaching model of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics in a controlled way.figure 1 | the universal dynamics of interface growth. the kardar–parisi–zhang (kpz) equation describes the dynamics of interfaces in a range of diverse systems, from wildfire fronts to bacterial-colony expansion. fontaine et al.2 established experimentally that the properties of excitations known as exciton–polaritons can be described by the same equation, offering a means of probing the physics of kpz systems using an experimental platform that can be precisely controlled.credit: l: mateus morbeck/afp/getty; r: eye of science/splexciton–polaritons (or simply polaritons) arise in semiconductor structures when light is confined by high-quality mirrors, allowing the trapped photons to become coupled to electronic excitations in the material. the resulting quasiparticles are bosons — the term for particles that can occupy the same quantum state — and if enough of these quasiparticles are in the same state, their microscopic quantum behaviour starts to become apparent on a macroscopic scale, in a phenomenon known as bose–einstein condensation4. read the paper: kardar–parisi–zhang universality in a one-dimensional polariton condensatepolariton condensates have a close cousin in ensembles of atoms, but only when the atoms have been cooled to temperatures in the range of 100 nanokelvin — whereas polaritons condense in the cryogenic regime of a few kelvin. aside from this 10-million-fold quantitative difference in temperature, there is a subtler qualitative distinction between these two condensation scenarios: ultracold atoms are in thermodynamic equilibrium, whereas polaritons are out-of-equilibrium systems. this means that creating a system of polaritons that is dense enough to form a condensate requires an experiment that balances fluxes in and out of the system. any light lost through the system of mirrors must be replenished by injecting quasiparticles into the system, through a suitable pumping scheme.so condensation can take place in both systems, and relies only on the atoms or quasiparticles behaving like bosons. but does this mean that these systems will display identical phenomena? in other words, does the fact that the polaritons are out of equilibrium on a microscopic scale mean that their behaviour will differ from that of the ultracold atoms on a macroscopic scale, where experimental observations are made? the answer is yes, and this is where the kpz equation kicks in: the long-distance properties of polariton condensates are governed by a measure of the wave-like nature of the quasiparticles called phase. and the stochastic dynamics of this phase map to the kpz equation5,6.originally, the kpz equation was derived to describe the dynamics of driven interfaces, such as the edge of an expanding bacterial colony6–8. such systems are markedly different from interfaces that are not driven, and the two types of system fall into different universality classes. this is the term used in statistical physics to describe groups of systems that share the same macroscopic properties despite having differences in their microscopic details. the kpz equation captures the non-equilibrium nature of a driven system in a single nonlinear term. by contrast, in an undriven system at equilibrium, this term becomes zero — in effect, putting the two types of system into different universality classes.the idea that polariton condensates belong to the kpz universality class was proposed some time ago5,6, but experimental evidence for this has proved elusive — until now. fontaine et al. constructed a one-dimensional lattice made of etched micropillars in a semiconductor material that they set up in a system of mirrors. by using an interferometric device that detects photons, they mapped out the way in which the behaviour of single polaritons was correlated in space and time. a careful study of these correlations revealed behaviour characteristic of the kpz universality class. hybrid light–matter states formed in self-assembling cavitiesthe authors also compared their experimental data with extensive numerical simulations using a model for both the pumping reservoir and the polaritons, with parameters determined through their experiments. the model produces another feature characteristic of the kpz universality class: fluctuations in the phase are governed by a probability function known as the tracy–widom distribution. this behaviour suggests that the system would remain in the kpz universality class even if topological defects in the phase of the polaritons were introduced, at least in the range of parameters studied by fontaine and colleagues. however, it remains a challenge for the future to explore this feature experimentally.as with many scientific advances, the authors’ achievement was made possible by an ingenious approach to a technical problem that had prevented previous observation of kpz physics in a polariton condensate. the difficulty arises from a phenomenon called condensate fragmentation, in which correlations in the phase of the polaritons break down at separations well below the system size, severely limiting the distances over which kpz behaviour can be observed. this effect is a result of attractive interactions between the polaritons, so one way around it involves engineering a system in which these interactions are repulsive. instead, fontaine et al. overcame the problem by forcing their condensates into regimes in which their mass was effectively negative. in combination with negative interaction energies, this amounts to a system with positive mass and stable repulsive interactions that evolves backwards in time.fontaine and colleagues’ experimental developments open up opportunities for exploring non-equilibrium phenomena with polaritons. two immediate directions for study are intimately connected to the new role for the key variable in the kpz equation — phase in place of interface. a first major challenge is the observation of kpz physics in two spatial dimensions, which has not yet been achieved experimentally, owing to the absence of 2d interfaces in nature9. recasting the interface in terms of the polariton phase elegantly circumvents this obstacle, but reaching the relevant system size poses a practical challenge.the fundamental difference between phase and interface sets another intriguing challenge. phase is a periodic variable that can develop topological defects, such as vortices, and these defects can drive phase transitions, even in systems comprising a single spatial dimension10. this possibility sets polariton condensates apart from other systems exhibiting kpz physics, and awaits experimental exploration. all in all, there are clear grounds for hope that exciton–polariton systems will offer a versatile platform for addressing key challenges in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics through highly controlled experiments.