lack of understanding of the immunology of sarcoidosis has limited therapeutic progress. however, evidence from a small open-label trial suggests that treatment with the janus kinase inhibitor tofacitinib can improve sarcoidosis symptoms, predominantly by inhibiting type 1 immunity.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to damsky, w. et al. inhibition of type 1 immunity with tofacitinib is associated with marked improvement in longstanding sarcoidosis. nat. commun. 13, 3140 (2022).the variable course and many different phenotypes of sarcoidosis have led to this disease being likened to a monster with multiple heads; indeed, the logos for the americas association of sarcoidosis and other granulomatous disorders and the world association for sarcoidosis and other granulomatous diseases depict st george, known as the ‘dragon slayer’, fighting such a creature. the findings of a new clinical trial1 support the notion that molecular characterization and targeted therapeutic approaches could herald important changes to the sarcoidosis armamentarium.advancement in the understanding of sarcoidosis supports its consideration as a heterogeneous, multisystem autoimmune disease2. although there is no effective therapy that targets all sarcoidosis phenotypes, substantial strides have been made in the use of biologic therapies for the treatment of some of them. the us fda has not approved anti-tnf agents for sarcoidosis, but these drugs have become standard therapy for a subset of patients3. therapeutic advances in rheumatoid arthritis (ra) have influenced the approach to biologic treatment of sarcoidosis. similar to ra, some patients with sarcoidosis might not respond to such therapy or require a high dosage. high concentrations of c-reactive protein can identify a subset of sarcoidosis patients who respond to infliximab therapy4. moreover, the complex dynamics of type i and type ii interferon signatures could predict responsiveness to anti-tnf therapy in ra5. as the therapeutic approaches in sarcoidosis are similar to those in ra, such signatures may prove beneficial in predicting response to anti-tnf therapy in patients with sarcoidosis. to further improve the treatment of the various sarcoidosis phenotypes, a molecular approach could be crucial.granuloma formation is a result of genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors and occupational triggers, and the fate of the granuloma is determined by complex interplay between innate and adaptive immune responses. ifnγ is a pivotal cytokine in the pathogenesis of sarcoidosis, as it activates the janus kinase (jak)–signal transducer and activator of transcription (stat) signalling pathway6. transcriptomics data also highlight the key role of the t helper 1 cell immune response, particularly ifnγ and type i interferon-driven signalling pathways, in sarcoidosis7. serum levels of tnf and type i interferon are associated with the clinical manifestations of sarcoidosis, with variation related to ancestral background that might reflect differences in the pathogenesis8. molecular analyses can help to identify the cytokines and signalling pathways that are most relevant to sarcoidosis phenotypes and characterize the response to therapy.damsky et al.1 studied the molecular pattern of sarcoidosis granuloma in 10 patients with long-standing cutaneous disease before and after treatment with tofacitinib, using advanced technology including single-cell rna sequencing. the primary outcome was change in csami (cutaneous sarcoidosis activity and morphology instrument) activity score at 6 months; secondary outcome measures included change in internal organ involvement, molecular markers and safety. all 10 patients experienced improvement in the skin, and six patients had a complete response, which is a rather intriguing finding. using pet, the researchers demonstrated improvement in parenchymal lung activity in the majority of those with pulmonary sarcoidosis, although they did not comment on changes in lung function.through mechanistic evaluations the researchers determined that cd4 + t cell-derived ifnγ was the central cytokine mediator of macrophage activation. additional type 1 cytokines were also associated with the pathogenesis of sarcoidosis. suppression of ifnγ, as well as other type 1 cytokines, correlated with improvement, specifically in the skin phenotype. the authors concluded that the improvement in sarcoidosis symptoms following tofacitinib treatment was predominantly a result of inhibiting type 1 immunity.one limitation of this study is the focus on skin involvement, which might not be representative of systemic sarcoidosis. ciclosporin also inhibits the cd4+ t cell-mediated inflammatory response, but in a randomized controlled trial of steroid-treated pulmonary sarcoidosis this drug was not better than placebo for improving lung function or as a steroid-sparing agent9, and ciclosporin has not been recommended for routine use in the treatment of pulmonary disease3. future trials evaluating tofacitinib for the treatment of pulmonary sarcoidosis are needed to understand the role of tofacitinib in non-cutaneous settings.one must ask, are we are ready to add a molecular approach (such as that used by damsky et al.1) to sarcoidosis clinical trials, and should we use this approach to identify patients who need to be treated? if the answer is yes, then several things must occur first. molecular targets could need to be identified in different organs within the same patient. it is easy to study molecular targets in the skin, as the skin is accessible and the risk with skin biopsy is much less than that with internal organ biopsies. however, molecular biomarkers in the skin might not represent internal organs. public availability of valuable molecular biomarker data from federal and industry sponsored clinical trials is a step in the right direction towards future aggregate analysis. molecular phenotyping of sarcoidosis will enable us to identify the proper therapeutic targets and the optimal therapeutic approach. the systematic collection of molecular data makes it possible to conduct unbiased analysis of any previously identified signature and enable retrospective analysis of a newly discovered signature.molecular phenotyping of sarcoidosis will enable us to identify the proper therapeutic targetsthe new insights from the study by damsky et al.1 identify therapeutic gaps, thus revealing opportunities for the development of novel organ-specific therapeutics. the future of sarcoidosis care lies in the molecular data; embracing these data and identifying an intelligent network-based approach could enable the creation of a molecular classification of sarcoidosis for use in clinical trials. we could reach great heights by standing on data within our reach, enabling us to rationally develop therapies for each individual sarcoidosis phenotype. we envision future molecular fingerprinting for various sarcoidosis phenotypes (‘sarcoprint’) having a role in the management of this challenging disease.future trials should consider that anti-tnf therapy is currently the standard of care for biologic therapy of sarcoidosis and has an acceptable safety profile, whereas the long-term safety of tofacitinib as monotherapy in patients naive to or who have failed to respond to anti-tnf therapy remains to be defined. a molecular approach to sarcoidosis care is an enrichment strategy for clinical trials. the use of optimal outcome measures is crucial; future clinical trials should focus on composite measures to capture the multifaceted nature of the disease. also worth bearing in mind is that studying cardiac sarcoidosis and neurosarcoidosis using a molecular approach will be more challenging than studying cutaneous disease. nonetheless, the work of damsky et al.1 is promising and challenging, and it might fundamentally change the way we design clinical trials.the work of damsky et al. … might fundamentally change the way we design clinical trialsseveral swords might be needed to target various sarcoidosis phenotypes. it is unclear if tofacitinib is the best sword to use; furthermore, the best time to declare war on the jak–stat pathway and the optimal safe dosage of tofacitinib are unclear. moreover, although tofacitinib therapy might be able to slay a major part of the disease, doing so could enable another head of the dragon to emerge10. therefore, precision medicine, artificial intelligence and sophisticated genomic approaches should be used to help shape the strategy to fight sarcoidosis.damsky, w. et al. inhibition of type 1 immunity with tofacitinib is associated with marked improvement in longstanding sarcoidosis. nat. commun. 13, 3140 (2022).cas article google scholar song, m. et al. sarcoidosis and autoimmunity. curr. opin. pulm. med. 27, 448–454 (2021).cas article google scholar baughman, r. p. et al. ers clinical practice guidelines on treatment of sarcoidosis. eur. respir. j. 58, 2004079 (2021).cas article google scholar sweiss, n. j. et al. c-reactive protein predicts response to infliximab in patients with chronic sarcoidosis. sarcoidosis vasc. diffuse lung dis. 27, 49–56 (2010).cas pubmed google scholar iwasaki, t. et al. dynamics of type i and type ii interferon signature determines responsiveness to anti-tnf therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. front. immunol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.901437 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar drent, m., crouser, e. d. & grunewald, j. challenges of sarcoidosis and its management. n. engl. j. med. 385, 1018–1032 (2021).cas article google scholar schupp, j. c., vukmirovic, m., kaminski, n. & prasse, a. transcriptome profiles in sarcoidosis and their potential role in disease prediction. curr. opin. pulm. med. 23, 487–492 (2017).cas article google scholar sweiss, n. j. et al. linkage of type i interferon activity and tnf-alpha levels in serum with sarcoidosis manifestations and ancestry. plos one 6, e29126 (2011).cas article google scholar wyser, c. p., van schalkwyk, e. m., alheit, b., bardin, p. g. & joubert, j. r. treatment of progressive pulmonary sarcoidosis with cyclosporin a. a randomized controlled trial. am. j. respir. crit. care med. 156, 1371–1376 (1997).cas article google scholar sweiss, n. j. & baughman, r. p. tumor necrosis factor inhibition in the treatment of refractory sarcoidosis: slaying the dragon? j. rheumatol. 34, 2129–2131 (2007).pubmed google scholar download referencesdivision of rheumatology, university of illinois, chicago, il, usanadera j. sweissdepartment of medicine, university of cincinnati, cincinnati, oh, usarobert baughmanyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to nadera j. sweiss.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssweiss, n.j., baughman, r. sarcoidosis: can tofacitinib slay the dragon?. nat rev rheumatol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-022-00832-1download citationpublished: 23 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-022-00832-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 