a grand challenge for bio-based plastics is the ability to cost-effectively manufacture high-performance polymers directly from renewable resources that are also recyclable-by-design. a one-step conversion of xylose to polyesters has been reported, combining a sustainable lifecycle with impressive materials performance.you have full access to this article via your institution.the global environmental crisis associated with plastics spans from manufacturing to end-of-life: both the emissions from petroleum feedstock extraction and refining, and subsequent plastic waste accumulation — generated by inadequate waste management and limited recycling infrastructure and technologies — must be addressed1. these issues have catalysed a drive towards the design of renewably sourced polymers that meet or exceed the performance of today’s materials and enable facile recycling2. specifically, performance-advantaged bioproducts are defined as ‘bio-based molecules that do not resemble existing petroleum-derived molecules in structure, and that offer a performance advantage over existing products’3 and include bio-based polymers. however, for sustainable new materials to be adopted industrially, challenges for biomass conversion must be met, along with a balance of high-performance material properties and recyclability or degradability. materials can be developed and identified as performance-advantaged bioproducts by conducting comprehensive material characterization, scale-up, techno-economic analysis, and life cycle assessment to validate multiple dimensions of performance2.lignocellulosic biomass is a renewable feedstock that can be used to produce fuels and chemicals, including monomers for performance-advantaged polymers. akin to petroleum refineries, the integrated lignocellulosic biorefinery concept aims to convert all fractions of plant feedstocks into valuable products. to compete with fossil carbon industries and enable a realistic global bioeconomy, biomass conversion processes must be foremost cost effective, exhibit reduced carbon footprints, and heed social and environmental considerations. these challenges can, in part, be inherently met by using non-edible feedstocks and atom-economical processes that retain the chemical energy and functionality of the biomass2. a team led by jeremy s. luterbacher has now met these challenges from cradle-to-cradle in their development of performance-advantaged biopolyesters based on a carbohydrate-derived monomer, diglyoxylic acid xylose (dgax, fig. 1) and corresponding ester dimethylglyoxylate xylose (dmgx)4. their process, and the resulting poly(alkylene xylosediglyoxylates) (pax) materials together are a model for research and development of sustainable plastics.the plant cell walls of lignocellulosic biomass primarily comprise cellulose, hemicellulose (xylan-type shown here for illustrative purposes), and lignin. acidic digestion using birch or corn cob feedstocks with glyoxylic acid yields isolated cellulose (up to 99% yield relative to glucan), dgax (up to 83% yield relative to xylan), and acetal-stabilized lignin (up to 31% yield based on klason lignin). each product can be further upgraded. figure adapted from ref. 10, cell press.beginning from non-edible feedstocks, luterbacher and co-workers use their signature aldehyde-assisted fractionation process5,6 (fig. 1) to efficiently deconstruct lignocellulosic biomass into three major fractions: a solid cellulose pulp, xylose (liberated from hemicellulose), and lignin — each of which can be further upgraded7. by conducting acid-catalysed deconstruction with glyoxylic acid, a two-carbon carboxylic acid-aldehyde, lignin and xylose are stabilized through acetalization, while pure cellulose is recovered in high yield. the team designed the process to be adaptable to the availability of local feedstocks, developing fractionation conditions that favour the yields of cellulose, dgax, or lignin monomers (after hydrogenolysis). feedstocks with high xylan and low lignin content, such as birch wood or corn cob waste, coupled with the mild fractionation conditions, achieve up to 83% yield dmgx relative to xylan after esterification of dgax. dgax is a rigid, tricyclic molecule that retains the structural integrity of the native carbohydrate and imbues the resulting pax materials (fig. 2) with performance-advantaged properties. the team polymerized dmgx with linear diols (c4–c6) to form high molecular weight, optically clear polyesters. the rigid, yet non-planar/asymmetric structure affords characteristics such as high glass-transition temperatures (tg, 72–100 °c), balanced strength and ductility (tensile strengths of 63–70 mpa, elongations at break of 50–80%, tensile moduli of 2–2.5 gpa), and competitive gas permeabilities compared with petroleum-derived plastics and popular bioplastics.dgax is converted to a methyl ester (dmgx) and polymerized with aliphatic diols. the resulting pax polyesters meet several design challenges for sustainable plastics beyond renewable sourcing, including robust processability and physical properties with built-in circularity via mechanical, chemical, or (proposed) biochemical recycling pathways.the sugar core and labile ester and acetal linkages of pax also enable facile depolymerization. chemical recycling by methanolysis (64 °c, 4 h) yields dmgx and diols, and occurs sufficiently rapidly to separate regenerated dmgx from polyethylene terephthalate (pet) and other polymers in a mixture. hydrolysis was slower (>180 days at ph 7 and room temperature, or 20 days at ph 7 and 37 °c), with dgax hydrolysing back to xylose under accelerated conditions (100 °c, >17 h). yet, cups made from pbx (poly(butylene xylosediglyoxylates); a pax using butane diol) could withstand short exposure to boiling water, unlike polylactic acid (pla) or pet, owing to a high tg of 100 °c. the materials also showed good stability under harsh extrusion conditions, which is promising for mechanical recycling in addition to chemical recycling or hydrolysis pathways.the techno-economic analysis for dmgx monomer production showed an estimated minimum selling price of ~us$1,500 per metric ton (t) from pure xylose and commercial glyoxylic acid, but production from agricultural residues would reduce this cost, as xylose accounts for 35% of the production cost. regardless, this estimate is near the upper limit for purified terephthalic acid (us$800–1,500 t–1) (ref. 4) and is significantly lower than the price of pla-grade lactic acid (us$1,900–2,300 t–1). for environmental impact, the cradle-to-gate life cycle assessment of dmgx showed a 20% lower global warming potential than that of terephthalic acid, which could be dramatically reduced to a 71% lower potential if glyoxylic acid could be produced from co2 at scale. routes to produce glyoxylic acid from other waste or renewable feedstocks are also possible via chemocatalytic and biological conversions8.both the breadth and depth of this work are impressive, as novel materials are often limited in scale, consequently hindering the thorough characterizations required to evaluate their potential. here, luterbacher and co-workers have not only developed a potentially economical and scalable process, and performed extensive characterization, but they also achieved a remarkable balance between high-performance properties and sustainable construction-deconstruction cycles (fig. 2). industrially relevant factors such as processability, material strength and ductility, gas permeabilities, and aesthetics were each considered in detail. moreover, quantitative comparisons were made against incumbents across performance, cost, lifecycle, and end-of-life metrics, clearly mapping the utility of pax within the growing field. the scope of pax material properties suggest that these polyesters would be potential candidates for single-use plastics such as hot/cold cups, cutlery, single-use food packaging, and non-food packaging. although such products are used and disposed of rapidly, performance cannot be sacrificed if today’s plastics are to be realistically replaced.the team recognize the many trade-offs that face sustainable materials across production, performance, and end-of-life, and they suggest solutions for how these can be balanced. the most obvious trade-off for pax is the hydrolytic stability. while rapid hydrolysis to benign monomers is an advantage for environmental persistence, it limits applications for food and beverage storage, despite the promising gas barrier properties. thus, luterbacher and co-workers propose strategies to increase hydrolytic stability through additives. any new food packaging material will also require government approval for health and safety, lengthening time to market, but this should not deter efforts. consumers find alternative products like paper straws and brittle forks unpleasant to use, and poor performance may ultimately generate even more waste. cost-effective single-use plastic replacements with high-performance properties are needed to increase adoption and ameliorate the plastic waste crisis.environmental degradation can also come with unintended ecological effects; to this end, standardized biodegradation tests need to be performed in various environments and the hydrolysis intermediate dgax evaluated for toxicity, as the team acknowledge. however, recycling (mechanical, chemical, or biological) is preferred, even for readily biodegradable plastics, and environmental degradation should not be considered as a large-scale or first end-of-life solution1. fortunately, the proposed mechanical and chemical recycling pathways offer a solution to keep pax out of the environment altogether. lastly, concerning pax production, the pathway which favours a higher dmgx yield is at the expense of lower lignin monomer yields, but an ideal biorefinery would utilize lignin as another valuable resource for coproducts rather than a waste product that is typically burned for energy9.overall, luterbacher and co-workers have demonstrated that this approach can produce genuine performance-advantaged bioproducts with xylose-based pax polyesters. this is backed by the extensive material characterization together with life cycle assessment and techno-economic analysis. each of the guiding principles for the development of performance-advantaged bioproducts was specifically regarded2, which is impressive for a first report of a new material. their comprehensive study acknowledges the standing challenge of balancing performance versus lifecycle, but they have indeed designed a plastic that can be sourced, produced, used and recycled potentially more sustainably than its petroleum-derived counterpart.law, k. l. & narayan, r. nat. rev. mat. 7, 104–116 (2022).cas article google scholar cywar, r. m., rorrer, n. a., hoyt, c. b., beckham, g. t. & chen, e. y.-x. nat. rev. mat. 7, 83–103 (2022).cas article google scholar fitzgerald, n. & bailey, a. moving beyond drop-in replacements: performance advantaged biobased chemicals (us department of energy, 2018); https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2018/06/f53/performance-advantaged%20biobased%20chemicals%20workshop%20report.pdfmanker, l. p. et al. nat. chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00974-5 (2022).article pubmed google scholar questell-santiago, y. m., galkin, m. v., barta, k. & luterbacher, j. s. nat. rev. chem. 4, 311–330 (2020).cas article google scholar shuai, l. et al. science 354, 329–333 (2016).cas article google scholar bertella, s. et al. chemsuschem 15, e202200270 (2022).cas pubmed google scholar schuler, e., demetriou, m., shiju, n. r. & gruter, g.-j. m. chemsuschem 14, 3636–3664 (2021).cas article google scholar schutyser, w. et al. chem. soc. rev. 47, 852–908 (2018).cas article google scholar bertella, a. & luterbacher, j. s. trends chem. 2, 440–453 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesrenewable resources and enabling sciences center, national renewable energy laboratory, golden, co, usarobin m. cywar & gregg t. beckhamyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to gregg t. beckham.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionscywar, r.m., beckham, g.t. producing performance-advantaged bioplastics. nat. chem. 14, 967–969 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01030-ydownload citationpublished: 26 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01030-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 