by maximizing cell–substrate force transmission, cancer cells can migrate towards either stiffer or softer substrate regions.you have full access to this article via your institution.cells continuously migrate through organisms, driving tissue-remodelling processes that are central in processes such as morphogenesis, wound healing and cancer progression, among others. this migration has traditionally been understood to occur in response to gradients in chemical factors (chemotaxis), but we now know that cells also move in response to mechanical gradients. specifically, cells in many contexts in vitro1 and in vivo2 migrate from soft to stiff areas of tissues in the process of durotaxis. writing in nature materials, isomursu and colleagues3 now report that cells can also migrate towards softer tissues. even more importantly, they demonstrate that this occurs because cells migrate towards a specific range of substrate stiffness, and identify the regulatory mechanism involved.although durotaxis was discovered later than chemotaxis, it is in fact an intuitive phenomenon. it can be understood only by considering that cells attach to their underlying substrate and exert forces on it via actomyosin contractility. as a simple analogy, consider a person on a skateboard with open arms and each hand holding a spring attached to a wall. if one spring is stiffer than the other and the person brings their arms together (contracts), the stiff spring will deform less and the person will move towards it (fig. 1a). this type of mechanism has been shown to drive collective durotaxis4. however, if mechanical guidance of migration is functionally relevant, this calls for more refined mechanisms able to tune how and when migration is triggered. if cells simply always moved towards stiffer tissues, then our brains would be depleted of cells and our neurons would all pile up around the much stiffer bones in the skull. luckily, this is not the case. thus, how is mechanically guided migration regulated and fine-tuned? to address this question, isomursu and colleagues consider that cells do not merely attach on two ends (similar to the springs of the skateboarder), but in fact adhere to their substrate all along the cell–substrate interface. contractile forces exerted by myosin are transmitted throughout this interface and can therefore be balanced at the sub-cellular level5. cell–substrate force transmission can thus be different in distinct regions of a single cell, influencing cell migration.a, if cells only apply contractile forces at the cell periphery, force balance implies that substrate deformation is higher on soft (rather than stiff) substrates. this shifts the cell centre of mass towards the stiff substrate. b, if force can be balanced throughout the cell–substrate interface, then force balance can be different on different sides of the same cell. high forces will slow actin retrograde flows, thereby promoting actin protrusion. thus, cell migration will be biased towards regions exerting high forces, and not necessarily towards stiffer substrates.cell migration is powered by actin polymerization pushing against the cell edge. myosin contractility counters this push, by pulling actin filaments away from the edge in what is known as retrograde flow. however, actin filaments are also attached to the substrate through integrin-mediated adhesions, generating a friction that resists contractility, and leads to traction forces exerted on the substrate. these forces slow retrograde flows, which in turn promotes actin pushing forces, cell-edge protrusion and cell migration. thus, cell regions exerting higher traction forces will push harder on the cell edge, and migration will be biased in this direction (fig. 1b). this conceptual framework is known as molecular clutch theory and predicts that cells will move towards regions where cells exert higher forces — not merely towards stiffer tissues. this is where it gets interesting, as molecular clutch theory has shown, theoretically and experimentally, that force generation by cells can be tuned by many factors. for instance, in cells that exhibit mechanosensing dependent on talin (a cytoskeletal protein that unfolds under force, triggering growth of cell–substrate adhesions), an increase in substrate stiffness leads to larger adhesions and higher forces, resulting in a monotonic force-stiffness relationship6. in such a regime, migration occurs only towards stiffer substrates. however, in the absence of such a mechanosensing mechanism, there is an optimal stiffness value where force transmission is at its maximum6,7 and, in principle, cells should migrate towards such regions. this means that cells seeded on substrates stiffer than this optimal value should migrate to softer, not stiffer, parts of the tissue (fig. 2).for cells attaching to compliant substrates via integrins, molecular clutch theory predicts that force transmission will be maximal at an intermediate value of rigidity. this is because on very soft substrates, integrins detach from the substrate before they can exert large forces. on very stiff substrates, force transmission is also ineffective because individual integrins experience high forces, but detach quickly from the substrate. this leads to migration towards the force transmission optimum at an intermediate rigidity. ecm, extracellular matrix.in their work, isomursu and colleagues show that this is indeed the case. the authors seed different cancer cell types on fibronectin-coated substrates with stiffness gradients, to which they attach via integrin-mediated adhesion. for glioblastoma cells that do not exhibit talin-mediated mechanosensing, migration occurs towards softer areas of the substrate. this demonstrates a mode that can be termed as negative durotaxis, which could explain previously observed movements in vivo of retinal ganglion cell axons towards softer tissues8. as predicted by their molecular clutch modelling, negative durotaxis can be tuned by altering parameters that control the optimal stiffness value (such as myosin contractility) and is abrogated in cells exhibiting talin-dependent mechanosensitivity.in summary, the authors demonstrate an elegant regulatory mechanism by which cells can fix a setpoint of tissue stiffness towards which they should migrate. this depends on force transmission, a parameter that in molecular clutch theory has been shown to be regulated not only by substrate stiffness, but also by parameters such as myosin contractility, integrin expression, integrin-binding partners, substrate ligand density and distribution, and substrate ligand type, among others9,10. thus, this delineates a rich palette of cell and tissue properties that could tune mechanically induced migration. among others, this mechanism could be relevant to understand cell migration through the different mechanical environments found in the various stages of cancer (invasion of primary tumours, intravasation, extravasation and metastasis). it could also shed light on complex migratory patterns during development, where all the parameters mentioned above are tightly regulated. the wide-ranging implications remain to be elucidated, but migration towards optimal, rather than merely high, stiffness opens the door to potentially important regulatory functions, perhaps even harnessed by evolution.lo, c. m. et al. biophys j. 79, 144–152 (2000).cas article google scholar shellard, a. & mayor, r. nature 600, 690–694 (2021).cas article google scholar isomursu, a. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01294-2 (2022).article google scholar sunyer, r. et al. science 353, 1157–1161 (2016).cas article google scholar shiu, j. y. et al. nat. cell biol. 20, 262–271 (2018).cas article google scholar elosegui-artola, a. et al. nat. cell biol. 18, 540–548 (2016).cas article google scholar chan, c. e. & odde, d. j. science 322, 1687–1691 (2008).cas article google scholar koser, d. e. et al. nat. neurosci. 19, 1592–1598 (2016).cas article google scholar elosegui-artola, a., trepat, x. & roca-cusachs, p. trends cell biol. 28, 356–367 (2018).cas article google scholar bangasser, b. l. et al. nat. commun. 8, 15313 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of physics, king’s college london, london, ukamy e. m. beedleinstitute for bioengineering of catalonia, the barcelona institute of technology, barcelona, spainamy e. m. beedle & pere roca-cusachsuniversitat de barcelona, barcelona, spainpere roca-cusachsyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to pere roca-cusachs.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbeedle, a.e.m., roca-cusachs, p. in search of a softer environment. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01345-8download citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01345-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 