structuring surfaces coated with nanoparticles in the subwavelength range allows almost complete control over the optical appearance of an object.you have full access to this article via your institution.the visual appearance of flat surfaces and curved objects is paramount in life and technology. it determines perceived attractiveness and allows for signalling in nature, beautifully illustrated by colourful birds, insects and flowers. since time immemorial, people have been fascinated by shiny metallic jewellery, gilded clothing, tableware, weapons and goblets. gemstones draw part of their appeal from a combination of reflectivity and colour effects. more recently, effect coatings for cars have gained in popularity. attributes such as glossy, matte or diffuse often describe the visual appearance, thus encompassing more than simply colour, colour purity and brightness.recent progress in materials science has led to many new structurally coloured materials. these are materials where colour emerges from nanostructured scattering interference instead of selective absorption provided by common dyes. structural colours are non-fading and can be a sustainable alternative to traditional colouring methods. researchers have designed dye-free pigments1 and explored coloured living bacteria2 and adaptive chameleon-inspired structural colour3, often mimicking colour formation in nature. however, those earlier studies primarily focused on colour and neglected other critical aspects of visual appearances, such as glossy reflectivity or a diffuse scattering background4. now, writing in nature materials, vynck et al. report how they have engineered surfaces on the subwavelength scale to control the entire visual appearance of an object almost at will5. the authors employ the concept of metasurfaces, which are artificial optical materials obtained by patterning a surface on subwavelength scales using metallic and dielectric nanostructures.vynck et al. use the bidirectional reflectance distribution function (brdf) to characterize the visual appearance of a surface6. computer graphics gaming applications also rely heavily on the brdf as well as other domains such as the remote sensing or photometry of celestial objects7. the spectrally resolved brdf measures the ratio of reflected radiant flux in a given direction to incident radiant flux in another direction. in contrast to simple wavelength scans of reflectivity, which are sufficient to determine colour, the brdf comprehensively quantifies phenomena such as diffuse and specular reflections. it enables a prediction of the colour and appearance of an object in different and varying environments.equipped with this powerful tool, vynck et al. can design and optimize the visual appearance of metasurfaces using a computer. to this end, they employed a combination of subwavelength surface patterning with resonant nanoparticles and thin-layered substrates in their simulation. the interplay between diffuse and specular reflectance is vital for setting the visual appearance — interferences and scattering can tailor the relative contribution.the modelled metasurfaces consist of a monolayer of dielectric nanoparticles, either metallic silver (ag) or high-index dielectric silicon (si). the nanoparticles have diameters between 100 nm and 200 nm to match the resonant scattering conditions for visible light. in addition, spatial structuring of nanoparticles over the surface provides additional control over the visual appearance. to this end, structural correlations affect the collective optical response of nanoparticle assemblies in two and three dimensions. as shown previously, liquid-like disordered structures and hyperuniformity can inhibit diffuse scattering or promote backscattering depending on the degree of correlations and the characteristic length scale of short-range order8,9,10. the degree of structural correlations can easily be set and used to dial in and out certain spectral features while retaining the same material composition. by controlling the spatial correlations of the nanoparticles, the authors can manage, quasi-independently, the colour of the specular and diffuse components of reflectance, leading to stunning visual effects (fig. 1b). beyond purely planar structures, adding high-index layered substrates with a substantial specular reflectivity can boost the interaction of light with resonant nanoparticles. here, photons, similar to a ball between a bumper and the wall of a pinball machine, bounce back and forth between the substrate and the nanoparticle monolayer, thereby enhancing the interaction between both.a, silver nanoparticles (radii of 90 nm, density ρ ≃ 4 μm−2) distributed randomly on a sio2/si substrate. without and with an additional thin sio2 layer of thickness (h) of 600 nm. b, spherical probe for a metasurface composed of the identical silver particles now at a density of ρ = 5 μm−2 on a glass substrate for different degrees of structural correlation (p). figure reproduced with permission from ref. 5, springer nature ltd.impressive visual appearances emerge from this interplay between specular reflections and diffuse scattering. this effect becomes evident when looking at a spherical metasurface visualizing the appearance of the surface at many scattering angles (fig. 1). vynck et al. conclude their study with an experimental demonstration of their concepts. they patterned a centimetre-scale silica (sio2) substrate with silicon nanodiscs using standard silicon lithography technology. the nanodiscs act as scattering particles. their experimental findings demonstrate the ‘diffuse-halo’ effect predicted by the numerical calculations (fig. 1b). strong structural correlation (p = 0.5) of nanodiscs suppresses diffuse light intensity near the specular reflection, which is surrounded by sharp angular lobes of diffuse intensity with a colour gradient.the work of vynck et al. realizes a whole range of essential tasks. first, it establishes a platform for multiscale modelling of the optical properties of complex surfaces. in addition, it shows how colour and coherent and diffuse reflection can be controlled with a minimal set of independent variables using a reasonably simple design. moreover, they show how in-plane structural correlations in a multilayer geometry can be exploited to control the perpendicular reflection. large-scale applications of surfaces of this kind based on the lithography process used here are still unrealistic. however, nanoparticle self-assembly, combined with roll-to-roll deposition, could open up possibilities for such applications in the near future1.droguet, b. e. et al. nat. mater. 21, 352–358 (2022).cas article google scholar johansen, v. e. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 115, 2652–2657 (2018).cas article google scholar wang, y. et al. matter 1, 626–638 (2019).article google scholar jacucci, g., vignolini, s. & schertel, l. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 117, 23345–23349 (2020).cas article google scholar vynck, k. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01255-9 (2022).mccluney, w. r. introduction to radiometry and photometry (artech house, 2014).butler, c. j. & elliott, i. stellar photometry: current techniques and future developments: iau colloquium 136 (cambridge univ. press, 1993).rojas-ochoa, l. f. et al. phys. rev. lett. 93, 073903 (2004).cas article google scholar leseur, o., pierrat, r. & carminati, r. optica 3, 763–767 (2016).article google scholar torquato, s. phys. rep. 745, 1–95 (1998).article google scholar download referencesphysics department, university of fribourg, fribourg, switzerlandfrank scheffoldyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to frank scheffold.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsscheffold, f. metasurfaces provide the extra bling. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01341-ydownload citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01341-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 