the inhibitory checkpoint molecule ctla-4 is essential for regulatory t cell function. a new study highlights the differential manner in which ctla-4 binds cd80 and cd86, which determines its cellular fate and orchestrates immune tolerance regulation.you have full access to this article via your institution.the potent inhibitory checkpoint surface protein ctla-4 is a major target of immunotherapy1. ipilimumab and tremelimumab are among the monoclonal antibodies that block ctla-4 to overcome tumor-induced immune tolerance, prolong antitumor immune responses and provide durable cancer immunotherapeutic effects1. ctla-4 inhibits t cell responses by opposing the function of the co-stimulatory receptor cd28 by competing with higher affinity for their shared ligands cd80 and cd86; by delivering inhibitory signals with its intracellular tail; and by depleting the ligands from the surface of antigen-presenting cells through transendocytosis1,2. although the power struggle between cd28 and ctla-4 in t cell biology has attracted considerable attention, the roles of cd80 and cd86 have been largely considered redundant. in contrast to this widely held view, in this issue of nature immunology, kennedy et al. report that cd80 and cd86 trigger distinct ctla-4 fates upon internalization3. specifically, the stronger binding affinity of cd80 to ctla-4 confers insensitivity to the ph drop in the endosome–lysosome network, promoting the ubiquitination and degradation of ctla-4, whereas the weaker affinity of cd86 permits ctla-4 recycling back to the cell surface, thereby increasing ctla-4 bioavailability (fig. 1a). the findings provide profound molecular insights that can be used to reshape ctla-4 targeting strategies for cancer immunotherapy.a, binding of ctla-4 to dimeric cd80 or monomeric cd86 triggers transendocytosis of ctla-4, which functions as an active inhibitory mechanism by depleting cd80 and cd86 from the surface of antigen-presenting cells (apcs). after transendocytosis, cd80–ctla-4 binding is insensitive to the ph drop inside the early endosome, whereas cd86–ctla-4 binding is not. this dissimilarity establishes a molecular basis allowing the sorting of ctla-4 to either degradative (cd80-targeted) or recycling (cd86-promoted) subdomains. endocytosed ctla-4 that transits through the endocytic recycling compartments is delivered to the cell surface, a process that requires the vesicle chaperone lrba and gtpase rab11. on the other hand, ctla-4 that is destined for lysosomal degradation enters tetraspanin lamp3+ and gtpase rab7+ late endosomes, which later fuse with lysosomes to generate a controlled acidic environment for the degradation of ctla-4. the estimated ph values, color-coded based on the gradient scale (left), typify individual endolysosomal compartments. b, mechanism of action of the engineered ph-sensitive anti-ctla-4 antibody derived from tremelimumab (trem). introduction of tyrosine-to-histidine mutations in the complementarity-determining regions of trem generates the ph-sensitive variant antibody, which prevents antibody-triggered lysosomal ctla-4 degradation and increases the bioavailability of ctla-4 on the cell surface. c, mechanism of action of the engineered ph-sensitive anti-ctla-4 antibody derived from ipilimumab (ipi). unlike the engineering concept in b, this approach ensures that the ipi variant possesses ctla-4 binding selectivity only in an acidic microenvironment (e.g., tumor) but not in healthy tissues (e.g., spleen). dc, dendritic cell.although many in the field refer to cd80 and cd86 as a monolithic ‘cd80/cd86’, or as b7 molecules, kennedy et al.3 revisited this conventional view to pose a fundamental question: do the two molecules have unique individual functions, or are they truly redundant? substantial recent data have revealed that cd80 and cd86 have distinct expression patterns, inducibility kinetics and biophysical properties4. however, the implications of these differences for signaling and function remained enigmatic. kennedy et al. assessed ctla-4 trafficking after binding of fluorescent protein-tagged cd80 or cd86 in primary human regulatory t (treg) cells and human cell lines using in vitro transendocytosis assays3. they found that, after binding, ctla-4 physically captured and removed cd80 and cd86 from ligand-expressing donor cells with comparable efficiency. perplexingly, unlike cd80 signals, cd86 signals were consistently diminished after uptake unless the t cells were treated with agents that neutralize intracellular ph and inhibit endosome–lysosome acidification. considering that ctla-4, like many endocytic proteins, can be recycled back to the cell surface or targeted for degradation in lysosomes after internalization, the authors combined microscopy and immunoblot analysis to assess the intracellular behavior of internalized ctla-4. even though both ligands are subject to ctla-4-mediated transendocytosis, cd80 and cd86 led to distinct trafficking patterns and subcellular fates for ctla-4 after binding (fig. 1a), resulting in different immune regulatory outcomes. disruption of cd86-mediated ctla-4 recycling, regardless of normal cd80 activity, impaired treg cell suppressive function and could be a possible cause of the failure to maintain self-regulatory tolerance.kennedy et al. observed that cd80 engagement triggers the ubiquitination of ctla-4, whereas cd86 binding promotes ctla-4 relocation to endosomes that contain lipopolysaccharide-responsive and beige-like anchor protein (lrba)3, a vesicle trafficking chaperone responsible for directing the recycling of ctla-4 to the cell membrane. interestingly, at the root of these divergent ctla-4 trafficking patterns lie the differential biophysical characteristics of cd86 versus cd80 binding to ctla-4. the weak affinity of cd86 confers a unique ph sensitivity to its interaction with ctla-4: after transendocytosis, cd86 dissociates from ctla-4 in endosomes with a lower ph (roughly ph 6.5–4.5). dissociated ctla-4 subsequently interacts with lrba, enabling ctla-4 recycling to the cell surface (fig. 1a). on the other hand, the strong cd80–ctla-4 interaction is ph independent and predominantly results in ubiquitin-dependent degradation of ctla-4 (fig. 1a). although ctla-4 is constitutively expressed on treg cells and induced on activated t cells, its expression on treg cells is particularly important2, as it prevents aberrant t cell responses against self-proteins and maintains lymphocyte homeostasis and immune tolerance. the new results therefore suggest an intriguing model in which treg-cell-expressed ctla-4 depletion of cd80 and cd86 make distinct contributions to supporting inhibitory function. in addition to elucidating an additional layer of the regulatory mechanism that tunes ctla-4 inhibitory activity, the data empower us to rethink our approaches to engineering safer, more effective next-generation ctla-4 blockade therapies (fig. 1b,c).kennedy et al. validated the differential roles of cd80 and cd86 in ctla-4 function by identifying ctla4 mutations in patients with autoimmune diseases with selective loss of cd86 binding3. despite retaining normal cd80 engagement and downstream activity, r70q and r70w ctla-4 mutants selectively lost the ability to promote cd86 transendocytosis, resulting in populations of antigen-presenting cells that were still able to trigger robust t cell proliferation after initial ctla-4 encounter due to continued cd86 expression. however, antigen-presenting cells that had endocytosed cd80 after interaction with the r70q or r70w ctla-4 mutant mediated inferior t cell stimulation. these results suggest that the r70q and r70w ctla4 mutants may be associated with human autoimmune pathology due to their inability to engage cd86 signaling. the results, though in vitro, showcase how slow and steady cd86-mediated signaling may win the race: weaker but continual signaling, resulting from ctla-4 recycling, may ensure proper immune tolerance and endow treg cells with their full suppressive function. indeed, the importance of regulating ctla-4 trafficking is emphasized in patients with mutations in the gene lrba5. the loss of lrba increases ctla-4 degradation, impairs ctla-4 recycling and reduces cell surface expression of ctla-4. consequently, patients with lrba deficiency develop autoimmunity, lymphoproliferation and humoral immune deficiency—a syndrome similar to those in individuals with ctla-4 haploinsufficiency or in mice deficient in ctla-45. together with the findings of kennedy et al.3, these data demonstrate the quantitative nature of ctla-4 signaling as a crucial factor in establishing precise communication amid the complexity of immune checkpoints to precisely regulate the quality of inhibitory signals.these recent findings, however, also raise a question: why is cd80 transendocytosis particularly coupled to ctla-4 degradation through ubiquitination? the endolysosomal network sorts through endocytosed cell surface proteins and targets them for degradation or recycling back to the cell surface. coupled to ubiquitination or endosomal retrieval, the endocytic internalization of a surface receptor not only terminates the signaling at the plasma membrane level, but also regulates the receptor’s intracellular residence time, acting as a spatial and temporal signaling fine-tuner to influence the signaling strength and duration of the cell surface receptor. in this case, ubiquitination or its absence controls the trafficking of internalized ctla-4 to the lysosome or its recycling to the plasma membrane, thereby providing spatial regulation. meanwhile, ubiquitination of ctla-4, in as yet undetermined stepwise process, limits the abundance of ctla-4 as a signal transducer to restrain the duration of ctla-4 signals, which may allow cells to adapt their outputs and remain responsive to their environment when required, thus offering temporal control.as we consider how degradative versus recycling fates actively remodel the ctla-4 signaling pathway, we must also inevitably focus on the significant crosstalk between the ctla-4 and pd-1 pathways. this crosstalk is particularly modulated through cis-interaction of cd80 and pd-l1 on antigen-presenting cells, which prevents cd80 homodimerization and consequent formation of a lattice that supports ctla-4 signaling. although cd80 normally exists as a homodimer, it may arguably prefer to form heterodimers with pd-l1, as its affinity for pd-l1 is greater than its affinity for homodimerization. importantly, pd-l1 that is heterodimerized with cd80 is unable to bind to pd-1 to deliver inhibitory signals6. one plausible consequence of cd80-dependent ctla-4 ubiquitination is the imposition of control over pd-l1 signaling dynamics. consistent with this hypothesis, a recent study suggested that depletion of cd80 from the membranes of antigen-presenting cells effectively frees up pd-l1 ligands, converting the antigen-presenting cells (such as dendritic cells) into cd80lo populations with high levels of free pd-l17. in conjunction with the findings of kennedy et al.3, those results suggest that cd80 transendocytosis could play two roles: first, it may trigger ctla-4 inhibitory signals to hinder cd28 co-stimulation in a cell-extrinsic manner; and second, it may increase the quantity of free pd-l1 on antigen-presenting cells to augment the inhibition of pd-1+ t cells. furthermore, a naturally occurring alternatively spliced form of ctla-4 that lacks the ligand-binding motif has been linked with susceptibility to diabetes in nonobese diabetic (nod) mice8. although this ligand-independent ctla-4 splice variant is still a potent inhibitor of t cell proliferation and cytokine secretion, it exhibits altered expression kinetics compared with wild-type ctla-48. moreover, the ligand-independent variant can only inhibit ζ-chain phosphorylation when it heterodimerizes with full-length wild-type ctla-48. together, these findings suggest that there is much to be learned about how cells use multiple pathways to regulate the interactome network to carefully control the correct protein complex composition, at the right time and place, and with the proper dynamics.intriguingly, the divergent fates of ctla-4 revolve around its context-dependent ph sensitivity, which is determined by the binding characteristics of its ligands cd80 and cd86. this raises an exciting challenge with great therapeutic promise: can we optimize ctla-4 checkpoint blockade by tailoring ph sensitivity to improve therapeutic efficacy and safety profiles? the answer seems to be an emphatic yes. with its imidazole group, histidine is the only ph-sensitive amino acid that confers ph-dependent binding9. at neutral ph, the imidazole group is apolar and hydrophobic, but when exposed to an acidic environment (e.g., ph 5.0), it becomes positively charged, polar and hydrophilic. thus, introduction of histidine to the ligand-binding interface of a therapeutic antibody may engineer ph-dependent ligand binding9.a key challenge in developing therapeutic antibodies is to uncouple their desirable effects from their unwanted autoimmune side effects. recently, ph-engineered versions of the anti-ctla-4 antibodies ipilimumab and tremelimumab — which, in their native forms, often cause substantial immunotherapy-related adverse effects—have been reported that have improved therapeutic characteristics. a variant of tremelimumab that has been altered to bind to ctla-4 in a ph-dependent manner — as kennedy et al. discovered cd86 does3 — is able to dissociate from ctla-4 after transendocytosis and recycle back to the cell surface rather than being targeted for degradation10 (fig. 1b). surprisingly, this tremelimumab variant retains its therapeutic efficacy without the autoimmune toxicity of the original antibody by reducing ctla-4 downregulation and increasing antibody bioavailability. a similar effort has been used to achieve the opposite effect, engineering an ipilimumab variant that can bind to ctla-4 only in a more acidic environment (for example, at ph 6 but not ph 7.4), such as the tumor microenvironment, but not in neutral peripheral tissues, such as the spleen11 (fig. 1c). encouragingly, in a first-in-human study, the ph-sensitive tremelimumab variant antibody that preserves ctla-4 recycling is well tolerated, with a very low incidence of immunotherapy-related adverse events12.overall, kennedy et al. provide crucial molecular details3 that broaden our understanding of the signaling dynamics of immune checkpoints. they demonstrate that ctla-4 trafficking plays an essential role in supporting the inhibitory signaling required to maintain tolerance, and that it may be possible to exploit the specificity of its intracellular routes to reshape the whole signaling network.baumeister, s. h. et al. annu. rev. immunol. 34, 539–573 (2016).cas article google scholar wing, k. et al. science. 322, 271–275 (2008).cas article google scholar kennedy, a. et al. nat. immunol. 23, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01289-w (2022).rowshanravan, b. et al. blood 131, 58–67 (2018).cas article google scholar lo, b. et al. blood 128, 1037–1042 (2016).cas article google scholar sugiura, d. et al. science 364, 558–566 (2019).cas article google scholar tekguc, m. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 118, e2023739118 (2021).cas article google scholar vijayakrishnan, l. et al. immunity 20, 563–575 (2004).cas article google scholar igawa, t. et al. nat. biotechnol. 28, 1203–1207 (2010).cas article google scholar zhang, y. et al. cell res. 29, 609–627 (2019).cas article google scholar lee, p. s. et al. mabs 14, 2024642 (2022).article google scholar li, t. et al. j. immunother. cancer 9, a998 (2021).download referencesdivision of microbiology and immunology, department of pathology, university of utah school of medicine, salt lake city, ut, usapreston a. humphries & wan-lin loyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to wan-lin lo.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionshumphries, p.a., lo, wl. two ctla-4 ligands, separate phates. nat immunol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01296-xdownload citationpublished: 23 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01296-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 