structural variants (svs), such as copy-number alterations, rearrangements and aneuploidies, are common somatic changes in cancer genomes and rich sources of driver oncogenes, but reconstructing these from sequencing data is a challenge. two new studies shed light on the diversity and importance of the sv landscape in cancer.you have full access to this article via your institution.genetic information is conveyed not only by the sequence of the bases but also by the structural organization of the dna itself. the three-dimensional organization of the genome controls transcription and cellular function, and it becomes markedly dysregulated in cancer in ways that are only beginning to be appreciated1. structural variants (svs) not only alter the amount and content of dna but also can reconfigure physical interactions between genes and regulatory elements, resulting in profound transcriptional dysregulation in cancer. extrachromosomal dna (ecdna), a cardinal type of sv associated with high-level oncogene amplification, can also foster rapid genome change through non-chromosomal inheritance, which can actively lead to altered cis and trans gene regulation2,3.current tools to decipher sv structure, largely reliant on whole-genome sequencing (wgs) and computational approaches, have facilitated a deeper understanding of the landscape and diversity of svs in cancer, which includes copy-number amplifications and deletions as well as more complex rearrangements such as ecdna and chromothripsi4,5,6,7,8. however, significant challenges remain, including achieving a better mechanistic understanding of how these alterations occur, in what genetic and cell lineage contexts they arise and how altered 3d genome architecture drives cancer pathogenesis and progression. two new papers in nature cancer shed light on these complex processes9,10. first, dubois et al. leverage longitudinal biopsies from patients to glean surprising and important insights into the role of svs as driver events in pediatric high-grade gliomas (phggs) and their relationship to clinical prognosis9. second, bao et al. provide a new tool to analyze complex genome rearrangements (cgrs) that they use to identify six recurrent cgr signatures in pan-cancer data, also yielding insights into potential mechanisms of ecdna formation that are ripe for experimental confirmation10. both studies exemplify the opportunity to derive mechanistic insights from clinical samples (fig. 1).complex genomic rearrangements (cgrs) that arise in a one-off event are often observed in tumor genomes. bao et al.10 and dubois et al.9 have devised computational methods to analyze tumor genome wgs and classify complex rearrangements into specific signatures. the signatures can be associated with mechanisms of chromosome instability (e.g., chromatin bridges and micronuclei), with genetic mutations (e.g., tp53 loss and kataegis) and with clinical outcomes to provide deep insight into cancer. as one example, specific signatures in both articles are associated with enhancer amplification and hijacking, increased transcription and head-on replication transcription collisions, resulting in dna breaks and ecdna formation. bfb, break–fusion–bridge cycle; ecdna, extrachromosomal dna; hsr, homogeneously staining region; mn, micronucleus; sv, structural variant.the advent of precision oncology and genome-based cancer treatments provide benefit, even if only temporarily, mainly for patients with cancers driven by actionable single-nucleotide variants (snvs) or gene fusions. however, for patients whose cancers are driven by svs, especially gene amplifications, the outcomes have been less favorable. many drugs that have been approved for cancer indications in the setting of snvs have failed to benefit patients when those same genes are amplified in their tumors. the ability of cancer cells harboring ecdna to rapidly change the copy number of the oncogene being targeted, which is a consequence of the non-chromosomal inheritance11, as well as the additional challenge of obtaining adequate pharmacological coverage of the abundant amounts of protein arising from highly amplified oncogenes, both contribute to therapeutic resistance. thus, a better understanding of the landscape of svs in cancer, their mechanistic role as drivers of tumor progression and therapy resistance, and the opportunities for therapeutic targeting has implications for further advances in precision oncology.dubois et al. study phggs, a rare, highly lethal brain tumor of children9. phggs are characterized by the oncohistone mutations h3.1k27m, h3.3k27m and h3.3g34r, along with tp53 loss and receptor tyrosine kinase (rtk) alterations. the sv landscape in phgg pathogenesis is less well understood, in part due to the difficulty of collecting tumor tissue from the midline brain location. dubois et al. analyzed wgs data from a multi-institutional north american clinical trial that collected pre- and post-treatment biopsies from patients with phgg, in a truly heroic effort and model of collaboration for the study of rare cancers9.the authors detected svs containing an amplified enhancer of the myc locus in 12% of diffuse midline gliomas (dmgs); in other cases, they detected mycn activation through enhancer amplification in ecdna. these results highlighted the importance of myc activation through enhancers and the role of ecdna amplification of enhancers in phggs. the presence of enhancer amplification, in the absence of amplification of the target oncogene, indicates that ecdna can promote oncogenic regulatory interactions in trans, as has recently been shown12. dubois et al. also detected ecdnas involving oncogenic rtks in nearly 20% of cases9, demonstrating that ecdna are highly prevalent and mediate oncogene amplification in phggs. further analyses revealed distinct sv signatures indicating two classes of dmgs, driven by complex svs (enriched for ecdna) or snvs. of note, the dmgs driven by complex svs were associated with significantly shorter survival, further supporting the concept that ecdna contributes to adverse outcomes for patients. longitudinal analyses of patients before and after treatment suggested that svs, including ecdnas, evolve over time and contribute to the rapid growth of phggs and the poor outcomes for patients, but that the sv landscape was not markedly influenced by therapy. beyond providing insights into key driver events in phgg, these findings underscore more generally the need for robust methods and careful analysis of sv signatures in dna samples from cancer patients across cancer types.joining other recent efforts to address this challenging problem4,5,6,7,8, the study by bao et al. also presents a new computational algorithm, starfish, designed to robustly infer and classify complex genomic rearrangements (cgrs) based on copy number and sv breakpoint patterns10. notably, they defined cgrs as a collection of sv events that were generated in a one-time event, rather than progressively, and their presence can be inferred directly from wgs data. from an initial 12 genomic features, bao et al. whittled down the input to five non-correlated, but high-variance, components that could be fed into a model to characterize and classify cgrs10. they analyzed more than 2,000 cgrs from over 2,400 tumors in the pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes (pcawg) database, revealing six signature clusters: (1) ecdna and homogeneously staining regions (hsrs), (2) breakage fusion bridge chromatin bridges, (3) large losses, (4) micronuclei, (5) large gains and (6) ‘hourglass chromothripsis’. the latter represents special type of catastrophic event named because of the shape of its copy-number profile, which was prevalent in prostate cancer samples. the authors examined the associations of these signatures with particular genetic mutations, revealing the diversity and complexity of cgrs, as well as the distribution and co-occurrence of the cgr signatures in different cancer types. this study also sheds potentially new light onto ecdna formation mechanisms. previous studies suggested that ecdna can arise through chromatin-bridge- and/or micronucleus-mediated chromothripsis13,14,15. however, the authors’ analysis of breakpoints and gene expression in cgr signature 1 (ref. 10) suggest an important role for replication transcription collisions, hint at a diversity of formation mechanisms and set the stage for direct experimental confirmation.these two studies highlight the diversity and richness of svs in cancer, shedding new light on their potential mechanisms of formation. they also nominate svs as important drivers of oncogenic gene-regulatory interactions, including through enhancer amplification and hijacking, further pointing to a critical role for altered 3d genomes in cancer pathogenesis. importantly, both studies extend our insight into the role of ecdna in cancer pathogenesis and recognize the effect of excessive transcription as a driving force both for ecdna formation due to collision with replication force and for ecdna maintenance through addiction to amplified and hijacked enhancers.in spite of rapid advances, the study of svs still faces a number of major challenges. sv shape and structure inferred through sequencing-based approaches such as starfish require orthogonal validation. although new tools that leverage proximity interactions, such as hi-c, add further confidence, the development and refinement of approaches to apprehend the physical structures in intact cells will be valuable. further integration of these molecular and cell-biological approaches, as well as live-cell imaging in tightly controlled model systems, has the potential to transform our understanding of the altered 3d genome in cancer. it is increasingly clear that cancers harboring svs, especially ecdnas, present a particularly difficult challenge. in fact, the studies by both bao et al.10 and dubois et al.9 hint at the molecular diversity and heterogeneity that can exist not only within a tumor, but within individual cells when ecdna is present. the recent finding that ecdnas can interact in trans inside hubs, and that enhancers and promoters can interact in trans across circles, highlights a remarkable combinatorial power that requires focused investigation. integrating mechanistic work to understand how these svs form and evolve, and their points of vulnerability, promises to increase our fundamental understanding of cancer pathogenesis and pave the way toward new and more effective treatment.dubois, f., sidiropoulos, n., weischenfeldt, j. & beroukhim, r. nat. rev. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-022-00488-9 (2022).turner, k. m. et al. nature 543, 122–125 (2017).cas article google scholar wu, s. et al. nature 575, 699–703 (2019).cas article google scholar hadi, k. et al. cell 183, 197–210.e32 (2020).cas article google scholar cortes-ciriano, i., gulhan, d. c., lee, j. j.-k., melloni, g. e. m. & park, p. j. nat. rev. genet. 23, 298–314 (2022).cas article google scholar li, y. et al. nature 578, 112–121 (2020).cas article google scholar drews, r. m. nature 606, 976–983 (2022).cas article google scholar steele, c. d. et al. nature 606, 984–991 (2022).cas article google scholar dubois, f. p. b. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00403-z (2022).article pubmed google scholar bao, l., zhong, x., yang, y. & yang, l. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00404-y (2022).article pubmed google scholar nathanson, d. a. et al. science 343, 72–76 (2014).cas article google scholar hung, k. et al. nature 600, 731–736 (2021).cas article google scholar shoshani, o. et al. nature 591, 137–141 (2021).cas article google scholar ly, p. et al. nat. genet. 51, 705–715 (2019).cas article google scholar zhang, c.-z. et al. nature 522, 179–184 (2015).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of pathology, stanford medicine, stanford, ca, usapaul s. mischelsarafan chem-h, stanford university, stanford, ca, usapaul s. mischel & vineet bafnacancer grand challenges edynamic team, cancer research uk, london, ukpaul s. mischel & vineet bafnadepartment of computer science and engineering and halicioglu data sciences institute, university of california, san diego, la jolla, ca, usavineet bafnayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to paul s. mischel or vineet bafna.p.s.m. is a co-founder and scientific advisory board member and has equity interest in boundless bio. v.b. is a co-founder, consultant and scientific advisory board member and has equity interest in boundless bio and abterra. p.s.m. is team lead of and v.b. is a member of the cancer grand challenges edynamic team.reprints and permissionsmischel, p.s., bafna, v. form follows function in cancer genomes. nat cancer 3, 905–906 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00428-4download citationpublished: 23 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00428-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 