an algorithm is presented for the simulation of reaction–diffusion systems on complex geometries, providing insight on how the interplay of cell geometry and biochemistry can control polarity in living cells.you have full access to this article via your institution.cell polarity is crucial to the functioning of living organisms1. it controls the correct positioning of cells within tissues by determining, among other things, the direction of cell migration. from a molecular point of view, cell polarity arises from the accumulation of given determinants to specific sites at the membrane of the cell. such localization can trigger molecular events that break the symmetry of cells and define the preferential axis of orientation (for example, the cell front and cell rear during migration)2. in most instances, the relevant reactions that drive polarity happen at the membrane3. diffusion at the cell membrane is much slower than in the bulk cytoplasm. thus, the bulk cytoplasm can often be thought of as a large reservoir from which proteins transfer to the membrane via binding/unbinding reactions. consequently, the rate-limiting processes that can drive polarization are membrane-bound. several lines of experimentation have shown that cell polarity can be formulated as a reaction–diffusion problem, in which nonlinear biochemical interactions coupled with molecular diffusion give rise to inhomogeneities in the spatial localization of crucial polarity determinants4. the establishment of cell polarity can therefore be framed as a problem of symmetry-breaking. in the simulations of existing mathematical models of polarity, one usually starts with homogeneous, uniform initial conditions and observes how the dynamic generates non-uniform steady-state conditions. for practical reasons, most of the available simulations of cell polarity have been limited to overly simplistic geometries, namely spheres and cubes. however, the geometry of cells can be complex, and geometric features, such as gaussian curvature, can impact reaction–diffusion dynamics. there is thus a need for fast and effective numerical methods to simulate partial differential equations in complex geometries. to meet this need and begin to shed light on how cell geometry can influence polarization, in nature computational science, miller et al5. provide an effective numerical method to simulate continuous models on complex geometries.the authors developed a method that works effectively for axisymmetric surfaces, which closely resemble the shape of cells in several contexts. specifically, they modified the double fourier space (dfs) method to work for generic closed surfaces of revolution. the dfs method maps a function on a surface into a rectangular coordinate system, which must be doubled up to ensure proper periodicity in both the azimuthal direction and across the poles. using their modified dfs method, the authors can compute the laplace–beltrami operator on curved surfaces (the laplace–beltrami operator is the generalization of the laplacian operator on curved surfaces), and then introduce a numerical algorithm that can rapidly estimate the operator and evolve the partial differential equations that describe polarization in space and time. using this method, they can rapidly simulate the establishment of cell polarity on complex geometry. these simulations reveal the existence of three relevant timescales (fig. 1). on the fastest timescale, reaction dynamics bring about the generation of spatial domains where the concentration of polarity determinants is higher. following this early dynamic, the domains expand and fuse, effectively generating one (or in some cases two) large and connected domain with a higher concentration of polarity determinants. in the third and slowest phase, the domain effectively flows to its final stable position. this last phase can be formulated as a variational process in which the steady-state stable solution corresponds to the minimization of the interface length between the two phases (regions of high and low concentration of polarity determinants). importantly, this observation provides the authors with an analytical criterion to compute the shape of the polarity domains for different cell shapes.the figure shows the outline of a cell, with blue circles indicating polarity determinants. those molecules are diffuse across the bulk cytoplasm and can bind and unbind to the cell membrane. the left panel illustrates how polarity is driven by positive feedback in the binding reaction. in the equations describing polarity, there is a positive feedback term so that molecules at the membrane favor the recruitment of other molecules. the reaction terms also include first-order dissociation kinetics. the diffusion is assumed to be fast in the bulk so that the concentration equilibrates to the appropriate uniform value. diffusion on the curved surface is solved using the improved dfs method. for the geometry illustrated, the model starts with few regions of higher concentration, which over time resolve into a single domain, which ultimately positions to one of the cell’s poles. this position can be deduced by geometric arguments. kb, rate of binding; kd, rate of unbinding.several non-intuitive examples are presented by miller et al., in particular in situations in which gaussian curvature is negative, suggesting the possibility of complex intracellular patterns. the authors also investigate whether or not differences in the cell geometry can bias the polarity in cells. in many relevant biological contexts, cells have to polarize in specific directions for functional reasons. thus, understanding whether geometric cues can be exploited to bias polarity in the correct direction represents a fundamental hypothesis6. notably, the authors show that these geometric cues are likely to be too weak to significantly influence the direction of polarity. other cues, most likely of a molecular nature, must therefore exist to orient cells properly in complex tissues.in the future, experiments analysing the interplay of geometry and external and internal cues in controlling polarity in living embryos and tissues are likely to reveal important new biological insights. this work shows how fast algorithms are needed to guide understanding of pattern formation in complex geometries, allowing progress from ‘spherical-cow’ approximations7.st johnston, d. curr. opin. cell biol. 51, 33–41 (2018).article google scholar devreotes, p. & horwitz, a. r. cold spring harb. perspect. biol. 7, a005959 (2015).article google scholar chiou, j. g., balasubramanian, m. k. & lew, d. j. annu. rev. cell dev. biol. 33, 77–101 (2017).article google scholar zamparo, m. et al. soft matter 11, 838–849 (2015).article google scholar miller, p. w., fortunato, d., muratov, c., greengard, l. & shvartsman, s. nat. comput. sci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00295-0 (2022).article google scholar thalmeier, d., halatek, j. & frey, e. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 113, 548–553 (2016).article google scholar diegmiller, r., montanelli, h., muratov, c. b. & shvartsman, s. y. biophys. j. 115, 26–30 (2018).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of cell biology, duke university medical center, durham, nc, usastefano di taliayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to stefano di talia.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdi talia, s. geometry and symmetry-breaking in cell polarity. nat comput sci 2, 473–474 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00304-2download citationpublished: 22 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00304-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 