mouse frailty can be measured with a frailty index by manually counting health deficits. vivek kumar and colleagues use machine learning to extract physical performance deficits from video data to create a ‘visual frailty index’. this automated technique may facilitate high-throughput research into new frailty interventions.you have full access to this article via your institution.experience tells us that people age at different rates. in the 1970s, the term ‘frailty’ was coined by demographers to describe heterogeneity in actuarial rates of aging1. this term now is used primarily to describe individuals at high risk of adverse outcomes when compared to others of the same age2. the degree of frailty can be measured in many ways2. one well-established approach creates a frailty index (fi) based on the accumulation of health deficits. the number of health deficits an individual has is divided by the total number considered (typically more than 30, including items such as gait disorders, skin disorders, hearing loss, and incontinence) to generate an fi score between 0 and 1, where higher numbers denote greater frailty3. more recently, this approach has been reverse translated for use in mice4. clinically evident signs of aging in many bodily systems, including those listed above in humans, are counted in each mouse and then divided by the total number of deficits considered to yield an fi score4. critically, this mouse frailty assessment tool has a high degree of inter-rater reliability5,6,7. thus, measuring frailty by counting health deficits is a well-established, validated approach to capture information about overall health in individual mice.the current fi approach requires manual assessment of individual animals. the development of an automated frailty assessment technique could facilitate large-scale studies in aging mice. in this issue of nature aging, vivek kumar and colleagues use machine learning to develop such an approach to frailty assessment8 (fig. 1). the authors first collected video data from a large sample of aging c57bl/6j male and female mice in an open-field arena and used neural network-based machine vision tools to extract various morphometric properties and exploratory behaviors as well as the quantity and quality of activity. they then asked trained experts to manually score frailty in the same mice using the mouse fi. several of the features extracted from the video footage correlated with frailty score and age. they then used those as covariates in a machine learning model that they trained to predict the actual fi scores computed manually by the experts. the resulting visual frailty index (vfi) scores generated by the model predicted individual frailty scores for both mice used and not used during model training, making on average an error equivalent to 1 fi item mis-scored by 1 point.a, development and validation of the visual frailty assessment tool. before manual frailty index scores are measured, aging c57bl/6j male and female mice are placed in an open-field arena for 1 hour to record morphometry, exploratory behaviors, and the quantity and quality of activity. the video recordings are analyzed using machine vision tools to extract features that correlate with manual frailty scores and age, and these features are then used to train an algorithm to predict a visual frailty index score. b, ultimately, mice can be screened using the visual frailty index tool alone.this new work by hession et al.8 is important. as frailty greatly increases the risk of disability, hospitalization and death in older people, there is considerable interest in understanding the biology of frailty, factors that exacerbate frailty and new strategies to treat it2. many investigators are now using the fi approach to explore the effects of various interventions on overall health and to identify underlying mechanisms2. there is strong evidence from mouse studies using the fi that the degree of frailty can be exacerbated by stressors such as polypharmacy9 and radiation therapy10. it can also be attenuated by treatment with geroprotective drugs (for example, enalapril)11 as well as by lifestyle interventions such as caloric restriction12 and exercise13. hession et al.8 produce convincing evidence that video data of mouse behaviors can be used to generate an automated vfi in aging mice. they show that the vfi correlates with age and with fi scores obtained by a validated manual fi assessment tool. crucially, they use both sexes and have completed both manual and visual frailty assessments on a large number of aging mice (n = 533). the results obtained with this large dataset are persuasive, including evidence that this approach can be used in both male and female mice. the authors suggest that the vfi could be used either to assess frailty on its own or as a supplement to manual fi methods. this work offers a substantial advance in high-throughput testing of new interventions to mitigate frailty.although this work provides proof-of-concept for an automated, standardized approach to frailty assessment in mice, there are some issues to consider. one barrier to its use may be difficulty in operationalizing the approach. the authors provide very detailed methodology along with the data, code, and models to help other laboratories implement the vfi. still, this may be challenging for non-computational labs to implement. the vfi also requires specialized equipment (for example, open-field apparatus, camera), which may present monetary and technical hurdles for smaller laboratories. another consideration is the time required to measure the vfi. mice require 35–45 min of acclimatization to the open field room before the 60-min recording phase. the authors show that the 60-min recording phase is much more accurate than shorter time frames. this contrasts with the manual fi assessment, which is estimated to take less than four minutes per mouse for experienced raters4,6. the use of multiple open field arenas with software to track many mice at once14 could greatly increase the number of mice that can be assessed per hour with the vfi. a final consideration is that the vfi relies primarily on physical performance measures to quantify frailty. as such, it may not sample health deficits in as many different domains as the manual fi tool, which samples multiple systems (for example, integument, musculoskeletal, vestibulocochlear, auditory, ocular, nasal, digestive, urogenital, respiratory, signs of discomfort, body weight and temperature)4. whether this reliance on measures of physical performance will affect the ability of the vfi to respond to interventions remains to be tested.this work raises several other fascinating questions. hession et al.8 suggest that the vfi may be improved by reanalyzing their existing data to add new features such as urination and defecation. a higher-quality camera could also potentially detect deficits in coat condition and fine motor control. it would be interesting to see how these alter the vfi score. it is also important to test whether the vfi is responsive to interventions known to reduce or increase frailty, including geroprotective drugs, exercise, caloric restriction and/or stressors. hession et al.8 found that frailty was higher in male mice, whereas most clinical and preclinical studies of frailty have found that frailty is higher in females15. however, the sex difference they observe occurs in mice younger than 16 months of age, whereas studies that reported higher frailty in females used older mice15. in fact, frailty scores in older female mice tended to be higher than in age-matched males in the new study8. it would be important to continue to investigate male–female differences in frailty, including with the vfi and in response to interventions. finally, this new automated frailty assessment tool could be deployed to conduct large-scale investigations of fundamental mechanisms that are responsible for the development of frailty in the setting of aging.the use of frailty assessment tools to quantify healthspan in aging animal models is an exciting development in the field of aging research. it provides the opportunity to test different intervention strategies, and even treatment combinations such as pharmaceutical plus lifestyle interventions to improve quality of life in our aging population. this new vfi approach has the potential to automate frailty assessment in large numbers of mice, which ultimately may facilitate the translation of laboratory-based findings to the clinic. future work in this area will be anticipated with interest.vaupel, j. w., manton, k. g. & stallard, e. demography 16, 439–454 (1979).cas article google scholar howlett, s. e., rutenberg, a. d. & rockwood, k. nat. aging 1, 651–665 (2021).article google scholar mitnitski, a. b., mogilner, a. j. & rockwood, k. scientificworldjournal 1, 323–336 (2001).cas article google scholar whitehead, j. c. et al. j. gerontol. a biol. sci. med. sci. 69, 621–632 (2014).article google scholar kane, a. e. et al. j. gerontol. a biol. sci. med. sci. 70, 694–695 (2015).article google scholar feridooni, h. a., sun, m. h., rockwood, k. & howlett, s. e. j. gerontol. a biol. sci. med. sci. 70, 686–693 (2015).article google scholar kane, a. e., ayaz, o., ghimire, a., feridooni, h. a. & howlett, s. e. can. j. physiol. pharmacol. 95, 1149–1155 (2017).cas article google scholar hession, l. e., sabnis, g. s., churchill, g. a. & kumar, v. nat. aging https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00266-0 (2022).mach, j. et al. exp. gerontol. 161, 111700 (2022).cas article google scholar fielder, e. et al. elife 11, e75492 (2022).article google scholar keller, k., kane, a., heinze-milne, s., grandy, s. a. & howlett, s. e. j. gerontol. a biol. sci. med. sci. 74, 1149–1157 (2019).cas article google scholar yu, d. et al. cell rep. 29, 236–248.e3 (2019).cas article google scholar bisset, e. s., heinze-milne, s., grandy, s. a. & howlett, s. e. j. gerontol. a biol. sci. med. sci. 77, 41–46 (2022).cas article google scholar seibenhener, m. l. & wooten, m. c. jove 96, e52434 (2015). google scholar kane, a. e. & howlett, s. e. mech. ageing dev. 198, 111546 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of pharmacology, dalhousie university, halifax, nova scotia, canadaelise s. bisset & susan e. howlettdepartment of medicine (geriatric medicine), dalhousie university, halifax, nova scotia, canadasusan e. howlettyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to elise s. bisset or susan e. howlett.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbisset, e.s., howlett, s.e. machine learning to spot frailty in aging mice. nat aging 2, 684–685 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00267-zdownload citationpublished: 16 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00267-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 