leggi in italiano microglia(green) interacting with neurons(red) in mixed rat brain cultures. microglia mediate immune responses such as inflammation, that is associated with neurodegeneration in parkinson's disease. credit: gerry shaw/wikipedia (cc by-sa 3.0)although known to wreak havoc in the central nervous system, parkinson’s disease could start from the gut, according to recent research on the association between neurodegenerative disorders and bowels inflammation. in at least a subset of cases, the condition could be linked to alterations of the microbiome – the population of bacteria and other microbes that live in the intestine.the hypothesis was presented during the 15th world congress on inflammation, organised in rome last june by the italian society of pharmacology. scientists from europe and the united states are investigating the molecular mechanisms that could support the link, and examining the possibility that parkinson’s and other neurodegenerative disorders could be one day treated at early stages with anti-inflammatory drugs targeting the gut.at the core of the idea is the ‘brain-gut axis’, a complex bidirectional communication system connecting the central nervous system with the enteric nervous system, a web of neurons embedded in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract. it includes nerves, such as the vagus nerve, the immune system, neurotransmitters and other chemicals produced by gut microbes1.we have growing evidence of this two-way communication route, says giovanni barbara, professor of internal medicine and gastroenterology at the university of bologna, a congress speaker. we know that psychological stress can trigger functional gastrointestinal disorders. further, dysfunction of the gut microbiota can induce anxiety disorder and depression. a mouse born and bred in a germ-free environment, barbara explains, shows incomplete development of the central nervous system. when the mouse is colonized with the right bacteria, the brain resumes its development.we currently don’t have any definitive evidence, but we have a strong hypotheses about the nature of the bond between neurodegenerative disorders, such as parkinson’s disease, bowel inflammation and microbiota imbalance, barbara adds.brain first or body firstparkinson’s is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a gradual loss of motor functions due to the death of neurons synthesizing the neurotransmitter dopamine, that mediates control of body movements. this degeneration of neurons is correlated with the aggregation in the brain of alpha-synuclein, a usually unfolded protein that can misfold and clump. most cases are sporadic, occurring in people with no known familial recurrence of the disorder. about 15% of cases run in families, and are associated with alterations in genes that modify the risk of developing the disorder.currently, the pathogenesis of parkinson’s disease is not fully understood, but there is increasing evidence that inflammation in the brain is implicated in both disease initiation and progression, says pascal derkinderen, professor of neurology at nantes university, another speaker. this inflammation is not limited to the brain but also involves the gastrointestinal tract and high amounts of inflammatory markers are found in the colon of parkinson’s patients.in light of the increasing evidence showing that parkinson’s disease patients exhibit gut inflammation, a relatively straightforward model for the pathogenesis of the disorder has been proposed, derkinderen explains: an unknown pathogen triggers intestinal inflammation, which in turn induces the expression and aggregation of alpha-synuclein in neurons of the enteric nervous system. the pathological process would then spread to the brain via the vagus nerve. alternatively, the effects of the gut inflammation on the brain could be mediated through systemic inflammation, he continues. this hypothesis is known as body first, as opposed to the brain first hypothesis. in this hypothesis, it’s the central system neurons degeneration that induces gut inflammation through a compromised vagal pathway2.both hypotheses can be true in different situations, says carolina pellegrini, assistant professor at the department of clinical and experimental medicine, university of pisa. using a lab mouse model of parkinson’s, her group documented the presence of alpha-synuclein clumps in the gut before the appearance of the neurological symptoms3. we found correlations between microbiota changes, damaged intestinal epithelium, inflammation and pathological alpha-synuclein, but we still don’t know what comes first, she says.target the gut to treat the brainpellegrini and colleagues investigated the role of nlrp3, a protein complex at the crossroad of microbiota alteration, inflammation and aggregation of pathological proteins. it’s a sort of immune-bacterial sentinel we found in gut epithelial and immune cells, she explains. it’s activated by different triggers: pathogens, bacteria and their products and also by alpha-synuclein clumps, and it starts an inflammatory cascade. we believe it is involved in the onset and progression of brain diseases, including parkinson’s.the researchers at university of pisa developed and patented a number of nlrp3 inhibitors. we tested the most promising one, called inf176, on the parkinson’s mouse models. if administered at early stages of the disease, it relieves neurological symptoms, pellegrini says. the aim of our research is to shed light on the molecular dynamics of parkinson’s pathogenesis, but i hope those findings will eventually pave the way to a new generation of gut-targeted anti-inflammatory drugs to treat neurodegenerative disorders.