in a recent issue of cell reports, xi et al. reported on their studies of an anti-glucagon receptor antibody in several mouse models of insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus, in which they show substantial increase in β-cell mass from enhanced replication and transdifferentiation of glucagon-expressing α-cells to insulin-expressing β-cells.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to xi, y. et al. glucagon-receptor-antagonism-mediated beta-cell regeneration as an effective anti-diabetic therapy. cell rep. 39, 110872 (2022).in a recent article from cell reports, xi et al.1 reported that chronic treatment (6–8 weeks) with an anti-glucagon receptor antibody (gra) lowered blood levels of glucose in several mouse models of insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus compared with untreated controls. importantly, gra treatment also resulted in a substantial increase in β-cell mass, up to two to three times greater than untreated controls, which was sustained after a ten-week washout period. this sort of durability of effect has long been sought for treating diabetes mellitus, whether for type 1 diabetes mellitus (t1dm) or type 2 diabetes mellitus.gra treatment also resulted in a substantial increase in β-cell massas gra treatment had shown a durable increase in β-cell mass in mouse models of chemically induced islet destruction, the authors tested their gra in non-obese diabetic (nod) mice, a model of spontaneous t1dm, with and without an immunomodulatory anti-cd3 antibody (fig. 1). there was initial normalization of blood levels of glucose in both groups with gra treatment, but, as expected, the autoimmune islet destruction continued in the group without immodulation (gra alone) and those mice returned to hyperglycaemia within 2–3 weeks. mice with only anti-cd3 treatment had stably lowered, but not normalized, glycaemic levels. while mice treated with anti-cd3 plus gra had statistically significantly greater β-cell mass than the untreated controls, it was somewhat disappointing that the β-cell mass of the anti-cd3 plus gra-treated and the anti-cd3 alone group did not differ after eight weeks of treatment. this finding suggests that most of the benefit of the treatment was attributable to the immunomodulation.xi et al.1 demonstrated that, in different mouse models of diabetes, β-cell mass can be replenished by chronic treatment with a glucagon receptor antagonist (gra). the mechanisms implicated in this β-cell regeneration were replication of β-cells and, importantly, the transdifferentiation of glucagon-producing α-cells to insulin-producing β-cells. clinically, gras have promise in lowering blood levels of glucose in human diabetes mellitus, but there remain questions about their safety. as yet, there is no clear evidence of their effect on expansion of β-cells in humans or non-human primates. pp-cell, pancreatic polypeptide cell.glucagon and insulin are the opposing hormones that regulate glucose homeostasis. both t1dm and t2dm occur when there is inadequate β-cell mass to produce enough insulin to maintain euglycaemia. however, over the past decade, the unger group has championed a key role for glucagon in diabetes mellitus2. glucagon increases hepatic levels of glucose and ketone production and is normally suppressed by locally secreted insulin. hyperglucagonaemia is seen in all forms of diabetes mellitus, so blocking the effects of glucagon and the hepatic production of glucose has been seen as a potential therapy for diabetes mellitus3.many aspects of the physiological consequences of blocking glucagon action have been reported from both preclinical and clinical studies. multiple preclinical rodent studies with gra have shown hyperplasia of the α-cells, as was expected on the basis of findings in glucagon-null mice4. some of these studies5,6 also found a (somewhat unexpected) increase in β-cell mass in insulin-deficient mouse models, as shown by xi et al.1. β-cell mass can be increased by enhanced β-cell replication, transdifferentiation of glucagon-producing α-cells into insulin-producing β-cells7, improved β-cell survival in the face of insult, hypertrophy of individual cells and neogenesis or differentiation from precursor cells usually found in the pancreatic ducts.using an inducible insulin-driven tet-diphtheria toxin mouse model of insulin deficiency, xi et al.1 showed that β-cell replication (measured by brdu and edu incorporation) in mice treated with two once-weekly doses of gra was almost double that of control mice without gra. what was surprising was that 20% of the β-cells in the insulin-deficient control mice were also replicating, whereas the original paper with this model8 showed replication of only 4.8% of β-cells, which is also more commonly reported for young adult mice. besides replication, xi et al. showed that some of the increased β-cell mass was from α-cell-to-β-cell transdifferentiation using lineage tracing of α-cells crossed into the tet-diphtheria toxin model. however, the contribution of transdifferentiation to the overall increase in β-cell mass was quite small in comparison with the enhanced proliferation of β-cells in mice treated with gra. after four once-weekly doses of gra, only 8% of β-cells were of α-cell origin (determined by dual expression of insulin and the α-cell lineage tracing marker zsgreen), compared with 5% of β-cells from igg control mice.some of the increased β-cell mass was from α-cell-to-β-cell transdifferentiationa similar paper5 published last year using a different gra and a different inducible insulin-deficient mouse model (panic-attac mice) documented near normalization of β-cell mass ten days after treatment, compared to untreated nondiabetic controls. what is intriguing in this study is that they found no difference in β-cell brdu incorporation (indicating β-cell proliferation) over 48 h in the gra group and igg controls (roughly 0.6% brdu+ β-cells in both groups), but a considerably higher proportion of lineage-labelled β-cells (indicating α-to-β-cell transdifferentiation) after ten days of treatment (17% with gra compared with 5% for igg control).while the other determinants of increased β-cell mass were not measured in either study, these two papers provide strong evidence of α-to-β-cell transdifferentiation contributing to β-cell restoration in adult mice. but are the quantitatively different results in how the β-cell expansion occurred due to the different gra, the different mouse strain or some other factor?since findings from rodents on β-cell growth are rarely confirmed in humans, we must be cautious in trying to extrapolate these findings of β-cell restoration after gra treatment to humans. normalization of blood levels of glucose with gra treatment was shown in diabetic mice and non-human primates9 in 2015, but few results on the effects of gra treatment on primate β-cells have been reported. importantly, both recent studies tested the translational potential of their gra using non-human primates1 or human islets engrafted into immunocompromised mice5, but did not provide conclusive data on the effects of gra on β-cell mass in these models. after treating non-diabetic cynomolgous monkeys for 13 weeks with a considerably higher dose of gra than in mice, xi et al.1 found that islet area had doubled and that the proportions of both glucagon-producing and insulin-producing cells had increased relative to total pancreatic cells. these data are suggestive of increased β-cell mass, but are not as conclusive as the mouse data.one finding in the study from xi and colleagues1 was that the percentage of glucagon-positive cells expressing the transcription factors nkx6.1 and pdx1 in the gra-treated monkeys almost doubled compared with controls (2.3% compared with 1.3% total pancreatic cells; not statistically significant), suggesting possible ongoing α-to-β-cell transdifferentiation. in the other study, the authors5 transplanted human islets into immunocompromised mice two weeks before inducing diabetes mellitus and then, two weeks after the induction of diabetes mellitus, administered four once-weekly doses of gra or igg control. this treatment was followed by a two-week washout period and the mice were killed ten days later. the authors found a restoration of normal levels of glycaemia during treatment with only a slight deterioration with washout. this study provided no data on α-cell or β-cell mass, but did show that α-cell proliferation remained stimulated in the gra-treated non-diabetic controls after antibody washout.by now, a number of glucagon antagonists, whether anti-glucagon receptor antibodies or small molecules, have been developed and studied as possible therapies for diabetes mellitus. in fact, there are 38 clinical trials using glucagon receptor antagonists currently listed in www.clinicaltrials.gov (four of which are in t1dm). while there are still concerns about side effects from long term gra treatment in humans, there seem to be some beneficial systemic effects of blocking glucagon10. however, data on gra stimulation of β-cell expansion (by whatever means) are still lacking for humans and even non-human primates, and might be just a pipe dream.xi, y. et al. glucagon-receptor-antagonism-mediated β-cell regeneration as an effective anti-diabetic therapy. cell rep. 39, 110872 (2022).cas article google scholar lee, y. h., wang, m. y., yu, x. x. & unger, r. h. glucagon is the key factor in the development of diabetes. diabetologia 59, 1372–1375 (2016).cas article google scholar wang, m. y. et al. glucagon receptor antibody completely suppresses type 1 diabetes phenotype without insulin by disrupting a novel diabetogenic pathway. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 112, 2503–2508 (2015).cas article google scholar gelling, r. w. et al. lower blood glucose, hyperglucagonemia, and pancreatic alpha cell hyperplasia in glucagon receptor knockout mice. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 100, 1438–1443 (2003).cas article google scholar wang, m. y. et al. glucagon blockade restores functional β-cell mass in type 1 diabetic mice and enhances function of human islets. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 118, e2022142118 (2021).cas article google scholar okamoto, h. et al. glucagon receptor inhibition normalizes blood glucose in severe insulin-resistant mice. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 114, 2753–2758 (2017).cas article google scholar thorel, f. et al. conversion of adult pancreatic α-cells to β-cells after extreme β-cell loss. nature 464, 1149–1154 (2010).cas article google scholar nir, t., melton, d. a. & dor, y. recovery from diabetes in mice by beta cell regeneration. j. clin. invest. 117, 2553–2561 (2007).cas article google scholar okamoto, h. et al. glucagon receptor blockade with a human antibody normalizes blood glucose in diabetic mice and monkeys. endocrinology 156, 2781–2794 (2015).cas article google scholar scheen, a. j., paquot, n. & lefèbvre, p. j. investigational glucagon receptor antagonists in phase i and ii clinical trials for diabetes. expert opin. investig. drugs 26, 1373–1389 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesdivision of endocrinology, diabetes & metabolism, department of medicine, beth israel deaconess medical center and harvard medical school, boston, ma, usamaria f. rubin de celisjoslin diabetes center, harvard medical school, boston, ma, usasusan bonner-weiryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to susan bonner-weir.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsde celis, m.f.r., bonner-weir, s. glucagon receptor antagonists might stimulate β-cell expansion. nat rev endocrinol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-022-00735-xdownload citationpublished: 15 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-022-00735-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 