understanding what drives household-level decisions to keep cooking with polluting cookstoves and fuels must be grounded in theory for sustained change to occur. new research examines the literature through a behavioural model and finds that affordability, technical aspects, and fuel supply are the main drivers of fuel stacking.you have full access to this article via your institution.over half of the world’s population continues to use primitive cooking stoves and polluting fuels, such as wood, coal, crop residue, animal dung, plastic and kerosene1. the burden of disease from household-level exposure to air pollution leads to premature death and disability from a host of diseases, ranging from cardiovascular and respiratory diseases to adverse infant outcomes like low birthweight2. this burden is shouldered by the poorest of the poor, primarily those living in south asian and african countries1. it is precisely these countries that must prioritize allocation of scarce resources to vaccination programs, provision of clean drinking water, sanitation, and electricity. this often leaves remarkably little left in the government coffers to provide solutions for households who are dependent on polluting stoves and fuels for daily cooking. a few countries, most notably india3, have provided national subsidies for cleaner fuels to poor households, such as liquefied petroleum gas, thus addressing household-level poverty, one of the driving factors of cooking decisions. despite best efforts to promote clean cookstove programs nationally, a sticking point remains to be confronted. that is, we must advance a more complex understanding of household decision points to transition to cleaner cooking.now, writing in nature energy, tash perros, priti parikh and colleagues have used behavioural change theory to reveal these decision points4. they conducted a structured literature review of 100 articles to categorize drivers of stove and fuel use using michie et al.’s capability-opportunity-motivation (com-b) model for understanding behaviour change5. the com-b model is grounded in theory using the theoretical domains framework (tdf), a synthesis of 84 theoretical constructs6, relevant to the implementation of new behavioural practices.an engineer once told me if we build a good stove, people will use it. thus, the most viable solution appears to be a technological one. in over 30 years of cookstove research, we have seen stoves that perform remarkably well under ideal, laboratory conditions, but are not adopted or used as intended in the real world. the lens of behavioural change theory lets us examine why stoves are used, or abandoned. at a household-level, we can understand the capabilities, both psychological and physical, required to use a new stove technology. we can target the motivations that either activate or inhibit behaviour to use a new stove. finally, we can address the physical and social opportunities to acquire a new stove and clean fuel for daily cooking.thus, behavioural theories, such as the com-b model and tdf, allow us to explain and/or predict the world7. cooking depends on rational behaviours that underlie decisions about which cooking device to use, independent of whether the device is ‘good’ or not. the cook behind the stove makes decisions about whether she (choosing the pronoun she, because in most cases the cook is a ‘she’) will boil water on the gas stove, on an open wood fire outside, or using an electric kettle. which technology to use for a given cooking task is referred to as ‘stove and fuel stacking’8. the complex, yet entirely rational, decisions behind these choices must be understood in order to promote the adoption and uptake of a new technology, like a cleaner cookstove. perhaps more importantly, if the goal of a program is to ‘de-implement’9 the sustained use of polluting stoves and fuel, we must develop behavioural interventions that address, for example, the motivations of households to continue to cook on a traditional stove.perros et al.’s study is one of the first reviews to use a theory-based framework as an organizational tool to catalogue the behavioural drivers of stove and fuel stacking. from the literature they examined, the researchers identified 61 drivers, grouped into 11 categories, and mapped these drivers onto the tdf and the com-b model. in examining capabilities, motivations and opportunities, the researchers determined that while many studies have focused on motivations (for example, safety and cultural compatibilities) and capabilities (for example, knowledge), the physical opportunities, specifically related to poverty and access, are the main drivers of stove and fuel stacking. future researchers should target these theoretically determined behaviours to design effective interventions.the single most important driver identified was the lack of physical opportunities related to affordability of stoves and fuels, fuel supply, and technical characteristics of the stove, accounting for 82% of all drivers. as noted by the research team, several randomized controlled trials have addressed this driver, including the household air pollution intervention network (hapin) trial. the hapin trial enrolled 3,200 pregnant women in rural india, guatemala, peru and rwanda and provided half of them with free gas stoves and fuel for 18 months, while the women in the control group continued to cook on solid fuel stoves. as perros et al. noted, trials like these address poverty by providing free stoves and fuel, but a unique aspect of the hapin trial was the use of frequent behavioural reinforcements, guided by the com-b model, to address the sustained use of solid fuel stoves in intervention households10. thus, the trial was able to achieve excellent compliance, with 96% reporting exclusive use of the lpg stove during pregnancy11, an achievement that was not seen in other trials that provided free stoves and fuel, but did not address stove stacking behaviours.other reviews have focused on factors that can influence the adoption and sustained use of clean cookstoves and fuels on a macro-level scale12, which is certainly important for policy-level change. but household air pollution researchers and stove program implementers should seek guidance from perros et al.’s valuable and unique synthesis of behaviour change levers that focus on the micro-level determinants — what goes on in the kitchen, in the household, where rational decisions are made with each cooking event. most of these decisions are driven by poverty, thus demanding that we create opportunities to address poverty reduction through stove and fuel subsidies that target the poor and those residing in rural areas.at the same time, we also need to focus on 18% of the drivers determined by perros et al. that were categorized into motivations and capabilities encouraging clean cookstove use. these include the cultural compatibility of the new stove to meet household cooking needs, household dynamics (including gender norms), safety issues related to fear of using gas stoves, and knowledge and training about how to use a new technology.implementation research should be grounded in theory and imbued with a deeper understanding of contextual factors that promote the use of a new stove. perros et al. have paved the way with their comprehensive review using behavioural theory to structure the implementation and evaluation of affordable, accessible, and clean stove technologies that address the drivers of stove stacking in low resource settings. it appears that we now have the response to why everyone stacks.state of global air 2020 (health effects institute, 2020); https://www.stateofglobalair.org/lee, k. k. et al. lancet glob. health 8, e1427–e1434 (2020).article google scholar pillarisetti, a., jamison, d. t. & smith k. r. injury prevention and environmental health. 3rd ed. (eds mock, c. n. et al.) ch. 12. (ibrd and wb, 2017).perros, t., allison, a. l., tomei, j. & parikh, p. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01074-x (2022).michie, s., van stralen, m. m. & west, r. implement. sci. 6, 1–12 (2011).article google scholar atkins, l. et al. implement. sci. 12, 77 (2017).article google scholar bender, m. nurs. philos. 19, e12198 (2018).article google scholar shankar, a. et al. energy policy 141, 111468 (2020).article google scholar prusaczyk, b., swindle, t. & curran, g. implement. sci. commun. 1, 43 (2020).article google scholar williams, k. n. & thompson, l. m. et al. bmj open 10, e037761 (2020).article google scholar quinn, a. et al. int. j. environ. res. public health 18, 12592 (2021).article google scholar puzzolo, e., pope, d., stanistreet, d., rehfuess, e. & bruce, n. environ. res. 146, 218–234 (2016).article google scholar download referencesnell hodgson woodruff school of nursing, emory university, atlanta, ga, usalisa m. thompsonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lisa m. thompson.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsthompson, l.m. the cook behind the stove. nat energy (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01101-xdownload citationpublished: 15 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01101-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 