the field of psychedelic medicines—therapeutics that trigger non-ordinary states of consciousness—has spawned dozens of companies, including several that are publicly traded. investors have recently been pouring money into them on the back of several trials indicating that these drugs could work in neuropsychiatric disorders like depression, addiction and post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd). in 2019, the us food and drug administration (fda) gave marketing approval to janssen’s spravato (esketamine), the s-enantiomer of ketamine, for depression that has failed to respond to two or more antidepressants. mdma (methylenedioxymethamphetamine, or ‘ecstasy’) may be headed for fda approval after a positive phase 3 trial for ptsd, with a second phase 3 trial nearing completion. delix therapeutics is taking a different approach: it’s developing analogs of psychedelic drugs called psychoplastogens that reproduce the changes in neuronal activity without the often extreme subjective psychological effects.many people suffering from mental illness can’t handle a hallucinogenic experience. for those who can, they need psychological advance preparation for a psychedelic as well as trained therapists to accompany them during treatment and in later integration of the insights gained. this is just not a very scalable model, says delix scientific co-founder david olson. so we coined the term psychoplastogen to really help us differentiate between these hallucinogenic neuroplasticity-promoting compounds and these non-hallucinogenic neuroplasticity-promoting compounds.david olson, delix therapeutics co-founder and chief innovation officer.credit: delix therapeuticsseven years ago olson, an organic chemist starting his faculty career at the university of california, davis, noted ketamine’s remarkable ability to very quickly overcome treatment-resistant depression. the drug induced rapid synaptic plasticity in the prefrontal cortex (pfc) of rodents. in depression and other neuropsychiatric illnesses, neurons in the pfc tend to atrophy; they shrivel up, synapses are lost, branches actually physically retract, olson says. ketamine, very excitingly, rapidly regrows these neurons within 24 hours, and it’s also one the fastest-acting antidepressants that we have discovered to date.could potentially longer-lasting serotonergic psychedelics, like lsd (lysergic acid diethylamide) and psilocybin, and empathogens, like mdma, be acting the same way? although they don’t share ketamine’s molecular target, olson decided to find out. in 2018, his group reported that lsd, psilocin (from magic mushrooms), dmt (n,n-dimethyltryptamine) and mdma increase dendritic spine density, synapse formation and intrinsic excitability in cultured rodent cortical neurons, with many of the same effects visible in drosophila larvae after drug exposure. their effects and ketamine’s seem to converge on a common downstream signaling pathway. using basic structure–activity relationships and medicinal chemistry to create variants, and cell-based assays to screen for effects, olson’s group, working with others, then discovered drug variants that did not seem to be hallucinatory in rodents, but strongly promoted neural plasticity while showing antidepressant-like effects.such compounds had obvious and commercial potential, leading to delix’s founding in 2019. compared with the classic serotoninergic psychedelics, these non-hallucinogenic neuroplasticity promoting compounds … we believe could be more scalable alternative, olson says. more patients would be able to benefit from them, for a variety of reasons. the company completed a $70 million series a funding round in september 2021 and has since raised another $30 million in convertible notes. delix’s derivative of the psychedelic ibogaine and the company’s mdma analog are both progressing through investigational new drug (ind)-enabling studies. we hope to move phase 1’s for one or both of those assets through the end of the calendar year this year and into 2023, says delix ceo mark rus.mark rus, delix therapeutics ceo.credit: delix therapeuticsnon-hallucinogenic psychedelics, if they work, could have the kind of market impact that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (ssris) and sodium norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (snris) enjoy. if you block the subjective effects and still get therapeutic benefit, that changes the whole landscape of how these drugs can be used, how they need to be regulated, the numbers of patients with various mental illnesses who can now gain access to them, says stanford neuroscientist rob malenka. he hopes delix succeeds. but, malenka adds, finding such psychedelic analogs that work in mental illness is anything but guaranteed. there’s a large segment of the clinical research community — that is the people who have been studying these drugs for a while — who are of the opinion that that is probably not possible.these skeptics argue that a powerful conscious experience is necessary for the drugs to work. i think the subjective experience, and some form of trip … is going to be required for therapeutic benefit, malenka says. that’s where i stand just based on intuition. there is also correlative evidence. in clinical trial patient surveys, emotional breakthrough during treatment is highly correlated with ultimate well-being, people have an altered sense of self and world view. this may also be accompanied by psychological insights, said johns hopkins university psychedelics researcher roland griffiths at a march workshop organized by the us national academies of sciences, engineering and medicine. there’s something about these experiences that’s integral to the construction of meaning-making. griffiths has pointed out that, in human psilocybin trials, mystical-type experiences predicted therapeutic benefit in depression, even when controlling for the overall psilocybin effect.correlation, of course, does not prove causation. molecular interactions — for example, lsd or psilocybin engagement of the 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) 2a (5-ht2a) receptor and subsequent downstream signaling, inducing synaptic plasticity in the prefrontal cortex — may determine most patient benefit, independent of subjective effects. . a mystical-type experience could be simply a biomarker for activation of the 5-ht2a receptor, says olson. his preclinical work in animals suggests that such target engagement, along with therapeutic benefit, can be achieved without altered consciousness, although these models are crude surrogates for human experience.olson stresses that subjective versus molecular effects is not an either–or proposition. and he agrees that subjective experiences probably do matter. but he’s betting his company’s future on the expectation that molecular effects alone will make enough of an impact to see delix’s drugs through to market. only clinical data will tell, he says. delix isn’t the only company pursuing psychoplastogen drugs. gilgamesh pharma, for example, has a non-hallucinogenic 5-ht2a receptor-targeted compound in preclinical development. it’s a competitive landscape out there, says malenka.malenka is cautiously optimistic about the prospects of psychedelics companies (he advises two of them), but regrets the hype that the field attracts. we have many years if not a decade or two of work before we really understand how to use [psychedelics and mdma], and who should be receiving them, and how frequently they should be given, all those kinds of issues, he says. if you actually count of the number of patients who have actually received these drugs in well-controlled clinical trials, it’s very small numbers.the delix founders see themselves as a neuroplasticity company, not a psychedelics company, says olson. atrophied cortical neurons and synapse loss also underpin neurodegenerative diseases like alzheimer’s, and drugs that safely restore such neurons to functionality could have an enormous impact, beyond mental illness, if they work as olson hopes.