coevolutionary warfare between bacteria and phage results in the diversification of anti-phage crispr arrays among the most successful bacterial competitorsyou have full access to this article via your institution.microbial communities in nature harbour tremendous amounts of interspecies1,2 and intraspecies3,4 diversity. although it is well accepted that within-species polymorphism will greatly affect the evolutionary outcome of between-species competition, studying such dynamics and their effects on evolutionary outcomes has been challenging. this is mainly because of the lack of a model microbial system for which we have a comprehensive understanding of the genetic basis of the mechanisms of competition. writing in nature ecology & evolution, guillemet et al5. use a genetically well-characterized bacteria–phage system to demonstrate that the coevolutionary warfare between polymorphic populations of bacteria and phage results in the accumulation of mutations conferring enhanced immunity to phages in a few but not all host bacterial genotypes. further, they show that this disproportionate accumulation of resistance mutations in a minority of the genotypes results in the establishment of a ‘royal lineage’, which originates in polymorphic bacterial populations even in the absence of the lytic phage. these findings demonstrate that between-host competition can have dramatic effects on host–parasite coevolutionary outcomes.guillemet et al. performed a short-term coevolution experiment between a polymorphic population of the bacterium streptococcus thermophilus and various populations of its lytic phage 2972. coevolution between s. thermophilus and 2972 phage is known to be driven by the cr-1 crispr-cas locus in the host6, which confers immunity to the phage, and by protospacer sequences in the phage. thus, coevolution experiments between s. thermophilus and 2972 phage, followed by sequencing of the bacterial cr-1 locus and of the phage genome over a short evolutionary timescale provided the authors with the opportunity to track the coevolutionary dynamics between resistance mechanisms in the host and counteradaptation in the phage.using bacterial strains and phages isolated from a previous study7, guillemet et al. performed a short-term evolution experiment in which strains of s. thermophilus and 2972 phage were propagated in three distinct regimens. in the first treatment, 17 strains of s. thermophilus were propagated in the absence of phage. except for one, each of the other 16 isolates were chosen because they harbour distinct levels of crispr-encoded immunity to an ancestral phage used in the earlier study7. in the second (monomorphic phage) treatment, the same 17 strains were cocultured with a single ancestral phage variant, which was same as the one used in the previous study from which the hosts were derived7. in the third (polymorphic phage) treatment, the same strains of bacteria were propagated with a polymorphic population of 16 distinct phages. each phage used here was chosen because of its ability to escape the crispr immunity of one of the sixteen bacterial isolates with differential resistance to the ancestral phage variant (fig. 1).cells of distinct colours represent strains with differential resistance to wild-type lytic 2972 phage, which have been conferred through crispr arrays; these strains also carry mutations at loci other than the ones that confer immunity against phages. phages shown in distinct colours represent genotypes with different escape mutations allowing them to evade the immunity of one of the distinct host strains drawn in identical colour. guillemet et al5. show that, in the absence of phages (a), a winner genotype (red) outcompetes other genotypes and increases in frequency within the population. in contrast, in the presence of polymorphic phages (b), a lineage of bacterial hosts is established who are descendants of the winner of intraspecies host competition — the ‘royal lineage’ of the host (shown here in red and shades of red). this in turn selects for locally adapted ‘royal lineages’ of phages in the community.hosts and their parasites generally follow negative-frequency-dependent selection, which selects against the most common resistant strain within a host population8,9. thus, it is expected that a sudden decline in the population of the most-common host (most-resistant host) might allow equal opportunity for all the host genotypes to acquire resistance mutations. however, guillemet et al. demonstrate that in the case of polymorphic bacterial populations, the frequency of host genotypes itself depends on the fitness relationships amongst the host. hence, new resistance mutations preferentially accumulate within what the authors refer to as a ‘royal lineage’ of host, which is established by the victor strain that dominates within-species resource competition in the absence of parasitic phage (fig. 1). here, royal lineage refers to a successional pattern in which only one, or in some cases two, lineages continually dominate a diverse population. moreover, the bacterial strains used in this study carry mutations in regions other than the crispr locus. these mutations might be responsible for the fitness differences among bacteria isolated in the absence of phages. thus, mutations in the hosts that are not directly responsible for the immunity against the phages might contribute heavily to the outcome of the coevolutionary arms race.it is important to note that in the polymorphic treatment, sixteen distinct pairs of resistant bacteria and phage (and one sensitive bacterial strain) were cocultured. each bacteria–phage pair is composed of a bacterial strain with a distinct crispr resistance array and a phage that can escape the resistance provided by the crispr array of the host they are paired with. hence, the fates of the hosts and their respective parasitic phage were likely to be tied in these experiments. indeed, the emergence of winning royal lineages among bacteria also resulted in the emergence of royal lineages of phages that are adapted to royal host lineages. interestingly though, establishment of similar royal lineages of bacteria in the monomorphic treatment suggests that the presence of phage resistant to the immunity in the royal designate is not essential for these outcomes.in one of the replicate populations from polymorphic treatment, royal lineages emerged from a strain that was dominated by the royal designates in the absence of phages. it is possible that the new royal lineage was established by the acquisition of a novel resistance mutation after a strong population bottleneck. this opens two interesting avenues for further exploration. first, to test whether evolved bacteria and phage isolates show changes in their susceptibility to ancestral phages and hosts, respectively. second, to investigate whether the outcomes reported here will remain constant if the transfer regimen were to involve a more stringent or less strong population bottleneck during each transfer.guillemet and colleagues’ study is based on the use of a synthetic community, and therefore the conclusions drawn might not be directly applicable to real-world microbial communities. however, the work does provide a primer that can be built upon. the study and the questions it raises are relevant for multiple reasons, from translational research to our basic understanding of eco-evolutionary processes. for example, microbial infections involve polymorphic populations of pathogenic bacteria10. thus, it is possible that antimicrobial strategies such as phage therapy might quickly select for reduced diversity in bacterial immunity mechanisms such as crispr, but in turn might positively select for accumulation of mutations that allow royal linages to be more competitive. this might affect their virulence and pathogenicity. moreover, similar approaches can be used to study the factors that might affect emergence and introduction of diversity, such as the effect of community mixing11,12, environmental fluctuations13,14 and spatial structure15,16 on the antagonistic coevolution between host and parasite.keller, m. & zengler, k. nat. rev. microbiol. 2, 141–150 (2004).cas article google scholar fierer, n. & jackson, r. b. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 103, 626–631 (2006).cas article google scholar kraemer, s. a. & velicer, g. j. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 108(suppl 2), 10823–10830 (2011).article google scholar sathe, s. et al. microb. ecol. 60, 137–148 (2010).article google scholar guillemet, m. et al. nat. ecol. evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01841-9 (2022).article google scholar barrangou, r. et al. science 315, 1709–1712 (2007).cas article google scholar chabas, h. et al. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 374, 20180097 (2019).cas article google scholar decaestecker, e. et al. nature 450, 870–873 (2007).cas article google scholar levin, b. r. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 319, 459–472 (1988).cas article google scholar lieberman, t. d. et al. nat. genet. 46, 82–87 (2014).cas article google scholar castledine, m., sierocinski, p., padfield, d. & buckling, a. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 375, 20190252 (2020).article google scholar gómez, p., ashby, b. & buckling, a. proc. r. soc. lond. b biol. sci. 282, 20142297 (2015). google scholar ratzke, c., denk, j. & gore, j. nat. ecol. evol. 2, 867–872 (2018).article google scholar chase, a. b., weihe, c. & martiny, j. b. h. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 118, e2101254118 (2021).cas article google scholar dubey, m. et al. commun. biol. 4, 492 (2021).article google scholar gude, s. et al. nature 578, 588–592 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesbacterial ecology and evolution group, department of microbiology and cell biology, indian institute of science, bangalore, indiasaheli saha & samay pandeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to saheli saha or samay pande.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssaha, s., pande, s. crispr evolves among the winners. nat ecol evol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01843-7download citationpublished: 15 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01843-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 