an active solid composed of confined robots is reported. through elastic interactions, the robots sync up to create novel states of coherent motion.you have full access to this article via your institution.synchronization phenomena are all around us. fireflies synchronize their flashing to help find mates, and muscle cells contract in unison to create a heartbeat. in the realm of mechanics, pendula sync up when coupled via a spring — in this way, elastic interactions can induce global, coherent motion. these phenomena are striking because they run counter to our experience of equilibrium systems: in thermal equilibrium, mechanical energy is distributed over many modes, resulting in disordered, incoherent motion. the principles governing how energy injection can translate into coherent motion remain elusive, but understanding them would be useful for engineering across many disciplines, including the design of robotic swarms.writing in nature physics, paul baconnier and colleagues1 report the emergence of collective oscillations in lattices of self-propelled robots called hexbugs, coupled together via elastic springs (fig. 1a). by propelling themselves, the hexbugs compress the lattice, which in turn re-orients the bugs. the elastic network turns this collection of self-propelled particles into a so-called active solid. in addition to their relevance for the design of novel robotic swarms2, these findings could shed light on the dynamics of biological tissues3,4.a, top: the oscillations of two coupled pendula tend to synchronize due to mechanical interactions. bottom: self-propelled robots called hexbugs are corralled in a circular confinement; each hexbug rotates within its cage. when two confinements are coupled together via a spring, these rotations synchronize their rotational angle, analogously to the pendula. b, many such confined hexbugs are coupled together to form an active solid. these self-oscillating crystals exhibit collective modes and pattern formation1.from starling murmurations to bacterial colonies, nature abounds with physical systems that consume energy on a small scale, that is, at the level of an individual starling or bacterium, yet display patterns on a global scale. these systems are generally referred to as active matter5, and theoretical descriptions focus on a few coarse-grained variables that are classified according to their symmetry.the most well-studied examples of active matter are fluids. however, there is a growing interest in the behaviour of solid materials upon microscopic actuation. in contrast to active fluids, a theoretical classification of pattern formation in active solids remains challenging. indeed, for a solid, what are the hallmarks of activity?for fluids, a key advance was the development of synthetic realizations6,7: platforms taking inspiration from natural systems, but using simple interacting elements, for example, colloids that self-propel along a surface by spontaneous rolling. when many such colloids are confined together, one rolling colloid re-orients its neighbours. this interaction causes the whole system to align into a ‘flock’, much like the patterns seen in starling murmurations.baconnier and colleagues have now developed an example of a synthetic active solid. the classical picture of a solid material in equilibrium is a simple crystalline lattice of atoms connected by springs. the lattice dynamics are then given by equipartition: energy is shared equally over all vibrational modes. baconnier and colleagues also started from a lattice structure, but drove it out of equilibrium at the level of each ‘atom.’ each node in the network was replaced by a self-propelled robotic hexbug corralled inside a circular enclosure (fig. 1b). each hexbug attempted to walk along its axis, compressing the lattice springs between the different enclosures. in turn, the springs pushed back, re-orienting the hexbug. in stark contrast to the distribution of energy found in equilibrium dynamics, the authors found that the interplay of non-equilibrium energy injection and elasticity results in a coherent oscillation of all the bugs.the system of baconnier and colleagues comes at a time when the experimental realization of active solids is only just beginning. for example, two independent groups have recently probed the elasticity of active solids composed of chiral spinners8,9. at first sight, the collective oscillations exhibited by the hexbugs appear distinct from these spinners. the non-equilibrium nature of both spinner systems is captured through their linear response, which exhibits elastic moduli forbidden in equilibrium10. by contrast, the synchronization exhibited by the hexbug system appears to be a fundamentally nonlinear phenomenon. this distinction sharpens the problem of theoretical classification: in what sense are all active solids the same, and in what way are they different?more broadly, the active solid designed by baconnier and colleagues poses new questions across physics, engineering and biology. active solids are prevalent in living systems, from clusters composed of many organisms to constituents such as tissues and the cytoskeleton (which gives structure to biological cells). from an engineering viewpoint, active solids bridge the gap between materials and robots. materials science aims to design new functionality from simple components, such as atoms or molecules, structured in a periodic pattern. by contrast, we typically think of robots as being centrally controlled and composed of many specially designed components.active solids offer a different approach to programming functionality: they are a type of robotic swarm. instead of centrally controlled, top-down design, the swarm’s behaviour comes from elastic interactions between many simple interchangeable units. for robots, such swarms promise decentralized control with built-in redundancy. for materials, they promise smart functionality and re-programmable re-use. to fully realize the potential of these ideas, we must first understand the patterns and synchronization that appear when solids get active. the work of baconnier and colleagues shows that this phenomenology already emerges from simple physical ingredients in a rich experimental platform.baconnier, p. et al. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01704-x (2022).article google scholar rubenstein, m., cornejo, a. & nagpal, r. science 345, 795–799 (2014).ads article google scholar liu, s., shankar, s., marchetti, m. c. & wu, y. nature 590, 80–84 (2021).ads article google scholar bull, m. s., prakash, v. n. & prakash, m. preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02934 (2021).marchetti, m. c. et al. rev. mod. phys. 85, 1143 (2013).ads article google scholar bricard, a., caussin, j.-b., desreumaux, n., dauchot, o. & bartolo, d. nature 503, 95–98 (2013).ads article google scholar yan, j. et al. nat. mater. 15, 1095–1099 (2016).ads article google scholar tan, t. h. et al. nature 607, 287–293 (2022).ads article google scholar bililign, e. s. et al. nat. phys. 18, 212–218 (2022).article google scholar scheibner, c. et al. nat. phys. 16, 475–480 (2020).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of physics, university of bath, claverton down, bath, ukjack binysh & anton souslovyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to anton souslov.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbinysh, j., souslov, a. active solids sync up. nat. phys. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01735-4download citationpublished: 18 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01735-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 