adipose tissue plays a critical role in systemic metabolism. this work describes how perturbations in the adipocyte progenitor cell repertoire during the perinatal period exert long-lasting metabolic effects in adulthood.you have full access to this article via your institution.there is much interest in understanding how the adipose tissue develops and changes throughout life. this interest is based on the multiple critical roles of this tissue, which include controlling metabolic fitness, thermogenesis, immune resilience, inflammation and tissue repair. the capacity of the adipose tissue to fulfil these roles is established during development and declines during an individual’s lifetime, and thus may contribute to an enhanced risk of metabolic diseases associated with aging1.most adipose tissue depots are formed in utero, which makes it difficult to access the tissue at its early developmental stages. however, the epididymal fat pad of male mice develops in the early perinatal period, providing an opportunity to access and directly examine the cellular mechanisms underlying adipose tissue development in this depot. in this issue of nature metabolism, zhang et al.2 report on the use of single-cell rna sequencing to compare the composition of epididymal adipose tissue in the early perinatal period and in adult mice. their findings reveal changes in the properties of a specific population of progenitor cells, which lose their capacity to differentiate into adipocytes as mice age. importantly, brief overexpression of the transcription factor pparγ (a transcription factor that strongly induces the adipocyte differentiation program) during the first seven days of the perinatal period results in durable changes in these progenitors, manifested by an enhanced capacity to undergo adipocyte differentiation in adult mice, and by protection from the adverse metabolic consequences of a high-fat diet (fig. 1).a, the adipose tissue contains a heterogenous population of multipotent progenitor cells (blue, grey and brown shades). commitment to the adipocyte lineage (brown shades) is followed by stages of adipocyte differentiation until specialized adipocyte functions are attained (nucleated brown). in adult mouse epididymal adipose tissue, a population of progenitor cells known as fips (light red) are unable to undergo adipose differentiation and impair adipose differentiation of other progenitor cells. b, in perinatal tissue, fips (dark red) can undergo adipose differentiation under strong differentiation conditions and do not impair adipose differentiation of other progenitor cells. c, transient expression of pparγ in progenitor cells during the perinatal period (grey and brown shades) results in enhanced differentiation capacity, adipocyte hyperplasia in adult animals, and resistance to detrimental metabolic effects of a high-fat diet.the precise cellular composition of the adipose tissue is currently being uncovered through multiple approaches, including single-cell, single-nucleus and spatial transcriptomics. one of the unique features of the adipose tissue is that although large lipid-laden adipocytes occupy more than 90% of its volume, they comprise less than ~40% of cells in the tissue. the remaining ~60% of cells are comprised of endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, immune cells and diverse progenitor cells3. adipose tissue progenitor cells are multipotent, as they are capable of differentiating down through several mesenchymal cell fates, including adipogenic, osteogenic, chondrogenic and other lineages4,5. the mechanisms that control the commitment of multipotent progenitors to a particular lineage, a process known as determination, are not known. once determination towards the adipocyte lineage occurs, cells undergo multiple steps of differentiation, culminating in expression of genes necessary for specialized lipid storage, adipokine secretion and other specialized adipocyte functions. moreover, adipocyte progenitors can differentiate into multiple adipocyte subtypes with distinct functions6, and adult depots contain diverse adipocyte subtypes in different proportions7,8. the multipotent nature of progenitor cells, and the diverse stages of determination and differentiation in which they may be at in any given time, are likely to confer substantial heterogeneity to this population, which has been evidenced in single-cell transcriptomic studies. accordingly, an important task in the adipose tissue biology field is to define the functional identity of the progenitor cell populations that have been demarcated in several studies by their transcriptomic profiles.prior studies in adult mice identified an adipose-tissue-derived progenitor cell population unable to undergo adipose differentiation, and which impaired adipose differentiation of other progenitor cells when co-cultured in vitro9. these inhibitory cells were isolated on the basis of their expression of the cell surface marker ly6c, and were named fibro-inflammatory progenitors (fips) due to their induction of inflammatory genes following stimulation in vitro and in response to a high-fat diet in vivo. in the current work, zhang et al.2 find that the perinatal adipose tissue contains ly6c-positive cells with a similar transcriptomic profile as adult fip. however, perinatal fips are able to undergo adipose differentiation in vitro, and do not impair adipose differentiation of other cells in vitro. thus, the authors demonstrate that perinatal and adult fips have fundamentally different properties, despite sharing a similar transcriptomic profile. of note, greater sequencing depth might be required to identify underlying transcriptomic differences, as this finding highlights the limitations of single-cell surface markers as tools to identify specific cell populations within an inherently heterogenous, plastic and dynamic context. notwithstanding this complexity, the authors clearly demonstrate that ly6c-positive cells lose the capacity for adipose differentiation during development to adulthood, and provide a model to further elucidate underlying mechanisms.strikingly, the authors also find that enforced expression of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar)γ in progenitor cells for only a few days during the perinatal period results in durable changes in the cellular composition and function of the adipose tissue during adulthood. specifically, adult adipose tissue from mice transiently overexpressing pparγ displayed smaller and more numerous adipocytes, which are associated with prevention of ectopic lipid deposition, maintenance of protective adipokine secretion, and an overall positive metabolic effect10. indeed, these changes were able to protect mice from high-fat-diet-induced glucose intolerance and insulin resistance once they became adults, resulting in a more metabolically favourable phenotype. in essence, these findings demonstrate that early alterations in adipose tissue progenitor cells can have long-lasting effects on adult adipose tissue and systemic metabolism.how might brief expression of pparγ during early adipose tissue development lead to this lasting influence? although the authors did not explore this directly in the current work, one possibility is that pparγ expression suppresses the mechanisms that make ly6c-postive cells refractory to differentiation over time. another is that pparγ expression may bias the initial composition of progenitor cells, such that a larger proportion become committed to the adipocyte lineage. alternatively, expression of pparγ in progenitor cells could result in their differentiation into adipocyte subtypes that are more metabolically favourable. although further studies will be required to reveal the specific mechanisms at play, the finding of diminished adipogenic capacity of adipose tissue progenitor cells over time, and of the durable protective metabolic effects that can be conferred during the perinatal period, suggests exciting new mechanisms underlying metabolic disease susceptibility and uncover new opportunities for intervention.ou, m. y. et al. cell death dis. 13, 300 (2022).cas article google scholar zhang, e. a. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00613-w (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar corvera, s. annu. rev. physiol. 83, 257–278 (2021).cas article google scholar zuk, p. a. et al. mol. biol. cell 13, 4279–4295 (2022).article google scholar yamamoto, n. et al. j. dermatol. sci. 48, 43–52 (2007).cas article google scholar min, s. y. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 116, 17970–17979 (2019).cas article google scholar emont, m. p. et al. nature 603, 926–933 (2022).cas article google scholar backdahl, j. et al. cell metab. 33, 1869–1882 (2021).article google scholar hepler, c. et al. elife https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.39636.001 (2018).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar ghaben, a. l. & scherer, p. e. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 20, 242–58 (2019).cas article google scholar download referencesprogram in molecular medicine, university of massachusetts medical school, worcester, ma, usasilvia corverayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to silvia corvera.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionscorvera, s. perinatal fat progenitors shape adult metabolism. nat metab 4, 963–964 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00626-5download citationpublished: 18 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00626-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 