earth’s forests have a major role in absorbing human-produced carbon dioxide and thus make a key contribution towards mitigating global warming. writing in nature, dow et al.1 report the results of their investigation into whether the extended length of the growing season due to global warming affects the amount of carbon sequestered when wood grows. read the paper: warm springs alter timing but not total growth of temperate deciduous treesevery year, forests remove from the atmosphere the equivalent of about one-quarter of the carbon produced by human activities2. this happens when trees, to support their growth towards the sun’s light, take up co2 into their leaves and transform this carbon into sugar, which constitutes the carbon source of the tree. this sugar circulates in the tree, feeds its carbon reserves and fuels the production of woody structures, such as the stem, branches and roots. these constitute the main carbon sinks, where the carbon can remain trapped for hundreds of years. quantifying the contribution of forests to the global carbon budget is essential to assess the consequences of climate change in the years ahead. at present, global warming is already advancing the time at which leaves emerge in spring3. this results in an earlier start to co2 absorption, which might therefore promote tree-stem growth, wood production and carbon sequestration4.dow and colleagues carried out a retrospective study to assess the growth of temperate deciduous forests in eastern north america. their findings show that earlier tree growth in spring does not necessarily translate into notable increased annual carbon sequestration in terms of wood production (fig. 1). dow et al. used remote-sensing data to confirm that leaf emergence in spring had been occurring earlier in the year at two iconic deciduous forests (the smithsonian conservation biology institute forest near front royal, virginia, and the harvard forest in petersham, massachusetts). then, the authors explored tree-stem radial growth (growth of the stem circumference), assessing the incremental change at weekly time intervals, using data from nearly 500 trees, collected over 6 years (harvard forest) or 10 years (smithsonian conservation biology institute forest). the results show, as expected, a corresponding trend of an earlier start of stem growth in warm springs.figure 1 | how early spring due to climate change affects tree growth. to understand the effects of climate change on the carbon sequestered annually by trees, dow et al.1 investigated the consequences of an early start to the growing season in deciduous forests. leaf emergence is followed by carbon uptake by the process of photosynthesis. over time, carbon can be captured for long-term sequestration if it contributes to radial growth (growth in the stem circumference) and wood formation. the areas under the curves for annual growth represent growth in terms of: the amount of carbon captured by leaves; annual radial growth (tree-ring width); and increase in woody biomass. the authors report that the early arrival of spring, shifting the margins of the growing season (lighter curves), had little impact on the final annual tree-ring width or the amount of woody biomass produced, whereas high temperatures in summer had a negative effect on radial growth (dotted curve). other studies11,14 (also plotted here as dotted curves) indicate that high temperatures and related drought can suppress carbon capture and woody-biomass production — carbon capture is less affected than is radial growth, which, in turn, is less affected than is growth in biomass.however, the authors found that, despite spring’s earlier onset, the length of the peak growing season, the maximum growth rates and the total annual tree growth did not change significantly. to confirm that the rise in spring temperatures had little effect on the final annual tree-ring widths, an indicator of growth, the authors quantified climate–growth relationships of more than 200 centennial-long tree-ring chronologies from more than 100 sites across the temperate deciduous forest belt in eastern north america. this analysis showed that, compared with the effect of spring temperatures, these forest sites were more sensitive to summer temperatures — which slowed woody growth — during the peak growing season. dow and colleagues’ unexpected results challenge current ideas about carbon allocation in trees.it is commonly assumed that, when deciduous trees bear leaves, they steadily allocate over time a large part of the sugar generated through the process of photosynthesis to the growth of annual tree rings. thus, if leaves appear earlier, it could be assumed that the rings would grow correspondingly wider during the year. however, such an oversimplified concept of tree growth does not fully encompass processes that occur during the course of the growing season. low phosphorus levels limit carbon capture by amazonian forestsas the authors report, the relationship between temperature and ring width is dominated by the negative impact of the warmer months (may to july). this not only shows that the dynamics of wood formation, and the amount of wood produced, changes during the growing season, but also indicates that warmer temperatures can have different effects depending on the time of the year (for example, stimulating wood growth in spring, but hindering it in summer). as shown by studies monitoring wood formation5, the ring-widening process follows a bell-shaped curve that peaks around the summer solstice. therefore, an early start of growth will make only a minor contribution to the final annual ring width.two elements further complicate efforts to associate the timing of leaf development (leaf phenology) with the dynamics of tree-ring formation. first, the ability to transform the carbon captured by leaves into woody structures depends on a process called xylogenesis, which occurs in a tissue called the vascular cambium and generates wood cells for water transport, mechanical support and storage of reserves, including water and carbon. in other words, carbon acquired through photosynthesis can be converted into woody biomass only to the extent that xylogenesis allows6. moreover, there is a high degree of autonomy between the carbon sinks and sources, thanks to the role of carbon reserves that accumulate in wood tissues. in addition, coarse roots and branches (which also contain large quantities of carbon) might exhibit different growth dynamics from the stem7.second, at a seasonal scale, growth encompasses two distinctive processes involved in wood formation8: on the one hand, cell proliferation and enlargement are responsible for growth in terms of size; on the other hand, cell-wall thickening and deposition of complex organic polymers called lignins are responsible for growth in terms of weight. to add to the complexity, these two processes exhibit different dynamics and are related to different environmental factors — their seasonal maxima synchronize with the maximum length of daylight (photoperiod) in the case of growth in size, and with temperature for weight gain5. 25 years of valuing ecosystems in decision-makingdow and colleagues’ study provides evidence that warmer springs have advanced the leaf emergence of temperate deciduous forests but have not substantially increased their wood production. this suggests that the extra co2 uptake does not contribute to sustainable carbon sequestration in the trunks of long-lived trees. the fate of this extra carbon is unknown, but another group has proposed that carbon taken up by trees might be directly emitted back into the atmosphere9.the results obtained by dow et al. challenge our current representations of carbon allocation in trees, and contradict certain projections from dynamic global-vegetation models, which are essential tools for assessing and interpreting the responses of terrestrial ecosystems to global changes and their feedback to the climate system. these models generally assume that plant growth depends principally on the amount of sugar produced by photosynthesis (but see ref. 10, for a contrasting example). however, different climatic factors influence photosynthesis and xylogenesis — mainly sunlight intensity and co2 concentration for photosynthesis, and temperature and water availability for xylogenesis11. we think that current insights into the process of wood formation and its sensitivity to environmental factors can help efforts to reformulate vegetation models12. such insights might improve the structure and outputs of these models, and enhance our knowledge about the carbon cycle and the climate system13.