firefighting foams often use per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or pfass, which don’t break down in the environment.credit: forget patrick/alamyresearchers have developed1 a way to break down long-lasting chemicals that they say is easier and cheaper than the harsh methods currently used. their work also hints at how these chemicals, which have been linked to health problems, fall apart — a finding that could help to destroy the persistent pollutants.per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or pfass, are widely used in products such as firefighting foams, waterproof clothes and nonstick cookware. dubbed ‘forever chemicals’ because they don’t break down under typical environmental conditions, pfass accumulate in soil and water and can persist in the human body once ingested. a 2015 us study2 found pfass in the blood of 97% of participants, and scientists have linked them to conditions including thyroid disease, high cholesterol levels and cancer. tainted water: the scientists tracing thousands of fluorinated chemicals in our environmentthe chemicals were originally designed by companies to be stable — that was a feature, but once they get into the environment, it’s a flaw, says shira joudan, an environmental chemist at york university in toronto, canada.pfass can be removed from water, but disposing of them has proved challenging. when buried in landfill, pfass leach into the surrounding environment, risking contamination of soil and groundwater.methods for disposing of pfass typically rely on expensive and harsh treatments, some of which require high pressures and temperatures above 1,000 °c. what’s more, there’s evidence that incinerating products containing pfass can spread these compounds into the environment, says brittany trang, an environmental chemist at northwestern university in evanston, illinois, who co-led the latest study. there’s a need for a method to get rid of pfass in a way that does not continue to pollute, she says.her team’s approach, published on 18 august in science, shows promise in breaking down one of the largest groups of pfass using inexpensive reagents and temperatures of about 100 °c.joudan is excited about the approach. this is the first time i’ve seen a degradation mechanism where i thought, ‘this could actually make a difference.’pfass owe their durability to a series of carbon–fluorine links, which are among nature’s strongest chemical bonds. instead of trying to break these stable bonds, trang and her colleagues targeted a chemical group containing oxygen atoms at one end of pfas molecules called perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids, or pfcas. by heating the compounds in the solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (dmso), with a common reagent used in the manufacture of cleaners and soaps, the researchers successfully knocked off the oxygen-containing group. this triggered a cascade of reactions that ultimately broke the compounds down into harmless products.using this approach, the team degraded ten pfass, including perfluorooctanoic acid (pfoa) — a chemical banned in most countries — and one of its common replacements.computational analyses suggested that pfcas fall apart two or three carbons at a time rather than one carbon at a time, as was generally assumed. understanding the mechanisms through which these pollutants break down could inform approaches to solving the forever-chemicals problem, joudan says.so far, scientists have identified more than 12,000 pfass. the latest degradation approach works on pfoa and closely related chemicals, but not on another common pfas known as perfluorooctane sulfonic acid, or pfos — which is potentially toxic and is no longer on the market in many countries. by contrast, existing methods can degrade both pfoa and pfos, says ian ross, who leads consulting on pfass at tetra tech, a consulting and engineering company headquartered in pasadena, california.ross also notes that using dmso as a solvent in waste treatment might not be practical, and he questions whether the approach will find real-world applications. it’s going to cost you a fortune if you’re going to buy bulk quantities of dmso and then dispose of the dmso — you can’t put it down a sewer, he says.the researchers hope that their study will help others to develop their own approaches to breaking down pfass. anyone working on pfass degradation can look at this and maybe have a better understanding of what might be going on, says co-author william dichtel, who studies pfas removal at northwestern university. even though i don’t pretend that this is the final solution, it really is why i do science — so that i can have a positive impact on the world.