food-rating systems that take both sustainability and nutritional value into account could grocery shoppers to make informed choices.credit: matthew horwood/gettyhealthier, more nutritious foods tend to be more sustainable and environmentally friendly than those with low nutritional value, finds an analysis of more than 57,000 food items sold in the united kingdom and ireland.the mammoth study, published on 8 august in proceedings of the national academy of sciences1, is among the first to estimate the environmental impact of products made of multiple ingredients, rather than only individual foods. this information could help consumers to understand how items compare in terms of both nutrition and sustainability, says co-author michael clark, an environmental scientist at the university of oxford, uk.what’s good for one is generally good for the other, says clark. you don’t have to make a choice that’s good for the environment but might negatively impact your health.source: ref 1.food production is a major contributor to climate change. a 2020 study found that, even if emissions from burning fossil fuels ended immediately, current trends in food systems could derail efforts to limit global warming to 2 °c above pre-industrial levels2.some foods — such as red meat — produce far more greenhouse gases than others. last year, a uk government survey found that more than half the people in the country want to make more sustainable choices around food. but because many food items contain multiple ingredients, it can be difficult to unravel the environmental impact of one product over another, says clark.we have information on the environmental impacts of commodities like wheat and soybeans, he says. but, if you’re walking into your local food shop, you’re not just purchasing wheat. transporting food generates whopping amounts of carbon dioxideto create a rating system that people would find easy to understand, clark and his colleagues used an algorithm to estimate how much of each ingredient was in thousands of products sold in major uk supermarket chains. the researchers then gave food items an environmental-impact score out of 100 — with 100 being the worst — by combining the impacts of the ingredients in 100 grams of each product. they considered several factors, including greenhouse-gas emissions and land use.the team found that products containing lamb and beef — such as ready-made meat pies — had the most serious environmental impact, scoring up to three times higher than products made with poultry. the lowest-impact foods tended to be made with plants and included bread products, fruits, vegetables, grains and beverages rich in sugar.comparing the environmental-impact score with nutritional information, the researchers found that healthier foods tended to have low environmental impacts (see ‘food for thought’). there were some notable exceptions: both nuts and seafood had a good nutrition score but relatively high environmental impacts.if made more user-friendly and widely accessible, food-rating systems such as this one could help people to make informed choices about what they eat, says olivier jolliet, a quantitative and environmental-health specialist at the technical university of denmark in kongens lyngby.there are large differences between foods, and we can start making choices that really improve our health and environment in a substantial way, he says. this sort of study can help us find our way there.