directed, active transport of cargo is essential for life on all length scales. a new system of artificial microtubules — consisting of a fibre with an embedded periodic array of magnetic inclusions — provides controlled active transport of microcargo by a rotating magnetic field, even under adverse flow conditions.you have full access to this article via your institution.the controlled transport of microcargos poses major challenges, such as how to beat the low efficiency of diffusive transport, how to employ active processes effectively, how to overcome the limitations due to thermal noise, how to switch transport on and off as needed, how to control the transport direction, and how to cope with complex environments and confined spaces. nature has evolutionarily developed a large variety of intelligent solutions to move cargo around at the level of biological cells. on the subcellular level, this is mostly achieved by motor proteins, which pull microcargo unidirectionally along the cellular highways that are established by microtubules, which are long and stiff polar filaments within the cell. on the cellular level, propulsion and transport is mostly achieved by the active motion of flagella and cilia, or by active body deformation. here, eukaryotic flagella and cilia generate propulsion by a snake-like travelling bending wave, while prokaryotic flagella are helical and generate propulsion by a rotational motion that is induced by a rotary motor in the cell wall. inspired by cytoskeletal motors that carry vesicles along microtubule highways in biological cells, hongri gu et al.1 have developed an artificial microtubule (amt), a structured microfibre with embedded micromagnets that serve as stepping stones to guide particles rapidly through flow networks.the approach by gu et al. is schematically shown in fig. 1. actuated by a rotating external magnetic field, the magnetic microcargos move along the outside of the amts. the cargo attachment to the fibre is achieved by embedding a one-dimensional array of magnetic nickel plates with a periodicity of ~100 μm inside a non-magnetic fibre using photolithography and electroplating processes. the embedded nickel plates possess a low magnetic coercivity, such that they can be magnetized dynamically by the external rotating magnetic field. consequently, they generate large local magnetic field gradients on the surface of the structured fibre, which provide anchoring points for the walking magnetic microrobots by a strong dynamic anchoring effect, and thus mitigate dispersal by external flows or fluctuations, for example in microvascular networks, thereby avoiding the limitations due to the hagen-poiseuille law. compared with existing magnetic microrobots — such as helical or flexible swimmers, and surface rollers2,3 — the microcargo travels an order of magnitude faster for the same driving frequency. even against strong fluid flows, the large local magnetic field gradients enable both anchoring and guided transport. finally, hongri gu et al.1 show that amts can facilitate the self-assembly of magnetic spherical microparticles into clusters, which — upon reaching a critical size — become motile by rolling along the amt and enhance their walking speed by bridging over stepping stones collectively.a, biological microtubules are polar cylindrical filaments made of the protein tubulin, along which microcargo is pulled unidirectionally by the motor protein kinesin. b, artificial microtubules are fibres with a periodic array of magnetic inclusions, along which magnetic microcargo is stepping forwards, driven by an external rotating magnetic field. note the different characteristic length scales in the two cases.the development of microrobots and micromachines is currently following four promising routes. firstly, inspired by the structures and processes in biological cells, synthetic biology aims to create similar structures by using new synthetic molecules, which facilitate the incorporation of novel functionalities4. an example is ‘dendrimersomes’, which act as cell-membrane mimics with hierarchical morphologies that resemble bicomponent rafts5. secondly, microrobots can be constructed independently from any biological model system. an important example is chemically propelled colloidal janus particles, which generate propulsion by catalysing a chemical reaction on one side, which induces a non-equilibrium distribution of reaction products6. an interesting aspect of these systems is that they can be controlled by light6,7,8, which facilitates the individual control of propulsion in an ensemble of particles with a multi-focus laser beam. thirdly, biological microswimmers and micromachines can be incorporated into an artificial microrobot to generate active force and propulsion. an example is a microrotor, which is driven by bacteria in the embedding fluid that interact asymmetrically with its ratchet-like surface9, or by chirally attached bacteria. finally, the physical operation principles of biological systems on the cellular and subcellular can be carried over and combined with chemical and physical processes to create life-like microbots2. for example, the propulsion of a bacterium by a bundle of helical flagella can be replicated by a micro- or nanoscrew, which is rotated by an external magnetic field. it is important to note that this last approach has been used very successfully in the past in many technological developments. for example, the development of aeroplanes has certainly been inspired by the flight of birds, but our planes do not look like pigeons. instead, the understanding of the aerodynamic principles of the lift force of a properly designed wing has facilitated the combination with completely non-biological propulsion by propellor- and jet-engines. in fact, in hindsight, propulsion by propellors and jets may not be so non-biological after all — at least on the scale of cells and scallops, where the rotating flagellar bundle acts very much like a propellor and the closing of the shells generates a water jet, respectively. the development of artificial microtubules by hongri gu et al.1 is very much in the spirit of this fourth route.the artificial microtubule and its transported microcargo1 is an externally actuated device. similarly, the information processing in systems of active colloidal particles with visual perception-dependent motility is performed externally7,8. the future challenge — and this is a grand challenge indeed — is to proceed from external actuation and information processing to autonomous self-propulsion and self-steering. the first steps in this direction, with the development of increasingly intelligent micromachines, are very promising10. another important challenge is — of course — miniaturization. the amts have a diameter of 80 μm, while biological microtubules are 25 nm thick. this is not an issue here, because amts are not supposed to be used inside of cells, but for cargo delivery inside microvascular networks and for minimally invasive interventions. however, current microrobots are closer to the centimeter than the micrometer length scale, so that there is a lot of space for improvement.possible future applications of amts include combinations with existing technologies, such as the guidance of amts by a microcatheter to reach narrower microvascular channels, and the guidance of microswimmers along amts before swimming the last stretch independently. interesting application scenarios could also be drug delivery and inclusion in lab-on-a-chip designs.gu, h., hanedan, e., boehler, q., huang, t.-y., mathijssen, a. j. t. m. & nelson, b. j. nat. mach. intell. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00510-7 (2022).article google scholar palagi, s. & fischer, p. nat. rev. mater. 3, 113 (2018).article google scholar hu, w., lum, g. z., mastrangeli, m. & sitti, m. nature 554, 81 (2018).article google scholar elani, y. angew. chem. int. ed. 60, 5602 (2021).article google scholar rodriguez-emmenegger, c. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 116, 5376–5382 (2019).article google scholar gompper, g. et al. j. phys. condens. matter 32, 193001 (2020).article google scholar lavergne, f. a., wendehenne, h., bäuerle, t. & bechinger, c. science 364, 70–74 (2019).article google scholar muiños-landin, s., fischer, a., holubec, v. & cichos, f. sci. robot. 6, eabd9285 (2021).article google scholar leonardo, r. d. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 107, 9541–9545 (2010).article google scholar huang, t.-y., gu, h. & nelson, b. j. annu. rev. control robot. auton. syst. 5, 25 (2022).article google scholar download referencestheoretical physics of living matter, institute of biological information processing and institute for advanced simulation, forschungszentrum jülich, jülich, germanygerhard gompperyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to gerhard gompper.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsgompper, g. delivering microcargo with artificial microtubules. nat mach intell (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00521-4download citationpublished: 09 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00521-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 