love’s the only engine of survival. —leonard cohenyou have full access to this article via your institution.in the study of dichotomous events such as death, cancer recurrence, heart attack or the failure of a light bulb, we can ask two questions: will it occur? and when will it occur?. both deal with probabilities, but the latter addresses the distribution of events over time—all light bulbs fail, but not at the same time—and can be addressed by survival analysis of time-to-event data, which we will introduce this month.survival (or reliability) analysis resembles logistic regression1, which can model the impact of risk factors or treatments on the probability that an event will occur, but its temporal component introduces two key complications. first, time-to-event data are often highly skewed—a few subjects may survive much longer than the median—precluding the use of approaches based on normality.for this reason, survival analysis uses probability distributions that typically include a parameter that controls skew, and the exponential (fig. 1a) is perhaps the simplest. it has the property that the probability of an event in a time interval of fixed length δ is independent of how long you’ve been waiting. if the event has not occurred by time t, then the probability of the event occurring in the next interval of length δ is p(t < t < t + ∆ | t > t) = 1 – exp(–λ∆), which does not depend on the starting time t. this independence makes the distribution ‘memoryless’.a, the exponential distribution f(t;λ) = λexp(–λt), where λ > 0 is a rate. b, the weibull distribution f(t;k,λ) = (λk)(λt)k–1exp(–(λt)k), where k > 0 is shape and λ > 0 is scale, which becomes a rate if k = 1. for both distributions, t ≥ 0 is time.though useful for physical processes like radioactive decay, the exponential distribution is often unrealistic for biological systems, where the probability of an event occurring in an interval does change over time. for example, if human lifetimes were exponentially distributed, then the probability of dying in the next δ = 6 months would be the same for a 25-year-old and a 75-year-old—which is not true. the weibull distribution (fig. 1b) accounts for this: when k < 1 (or k > 1), the probability of an event decreases (or increases) as the starting time t increases; when k = 1, the weibull distribution reduces to the memoryless exponential.the second complication in survival analysis is censoring: failure to fully observe the time-to-event value for all subjects. consider a 3-year study of a new blood pressure medication that tracks the time from the start of treatment until a heart attack occurs. if a subject withdraws from the study or dies after 2 years, all we know is that no heart attack occurred in 2 years—the subject’s time-to-event would be censored at 2 years. similarly, if the subject doesn’t have a heart attack during the study, they would be censored at 3 years. this is ‘right censoring’: we don’t know when or if the event happens but, if it does, we know that it is after a specific time point.conversely, in ‘left censoring’, we know only that an event happened before a specific time point. for example, in a study of the time between hiv infection and onset of aids, we do not know the time of infection—only that it occurred before the positive hiv test.if we can estimate the earliest possible infection date, such as when the subject started using shared needles, we can define an interval during which infection likely took place. this is ‘interval censoring’ and is common in studies where continuous monitoring of the outcome is not possible. for example, a cancer recurrence diagnosis during a checkup tells us that the recurrence happened during the interval between consecutive clinic visits.time-to-event data are commonly displayed as a step function that drops at event times to show the probability that an event happened after a given time from the start of observation. called reliability curves, in a medical context these are known as survival curves because they often track the fraction of subjects that survive beyond a given time point t, defined as s(t) = p(t > t), where t is the time of death. they are typically estimated non-parametrically using the kaplan–meier (km) approach2,3 and can account for censored observations—right censoring is easy to incorporate, although accounting for left or interval censoring is more technical.we illustrate the km approach using a hypothetical 12-month survival study, with events that may be right censored owing to participant drop-out or study termination (fig. 2). suppose our time-to-event data are t = 4, 5.2, 6.5+, 8, 9+, 9.5, 9.8, 10.5+, 11+ and 12+, where ‘+’ indicates that an event was right censored (death occurred after censoring time t).a, time-to-event data records death (black circles) or right-censoring times due to drop-out or study end (hollow circles). b, the kaplan–meier curve of the data in a showing a median survival of 9.8 months.the km curve starts at t = 0, when 100% of the subjects are alive, for a survival fraction of s(0) = 1 (fig. 2b). the first event at t = 4 is a death, and the curve drops to s(4) = 9/10, since 9 out of 10 subjects survived to 4 months. the second event (t = 5.2) is also a death and s(5.2) = 8/10. we can interpret 8/10 as the product of the conditional probability (8/9) of surviving to t > 5.2 given survival to t > 4 times the probability (9/10) of surviving to t > 4.at t = 6.5, a subject drops out and must be right censored. although not an event, the censoring reduces the number of subjects at risk to 7, and this drop must be accounted for at the next death (t = 8) by using the conditional product s(8) = (9/10)(8/9)(6/7) = 0.686. this is lower than s(8) = 7/10 that would be obtained if nothing happened at t = 6.5. thus, a censored event increases the drop in s at the next observed event. the rest of the km curve is calculated analogously.the km curve yields an estimate of median survival time (to which 50% subjects survive — preferred to the mean because of skew) by intersecting the horizontal line at 50% survival with the curve (fig. 2b). uncertainty in km estimates is typically expressed by 95% confidence intervals4 (95% ci), either horizontally (median, or other percentile of time) or vertically (percentage survival at a given time point). the cis can be constructed by modelling survival variance at each time point using the binomial distribution, applicable because the km curve is a product of conditional probabilities that are binomial proportions estimated by the ratio of events to subjects at risk. with increased sample size, the steps in the km curve become smaller and both the curve (now smoother) and the estimated medians get closer to the ground truth.censoring is a missing-data problem and to avoid bias must be always accounted for. for example, if we were to treat drop-outs as observed events, we would underestimate the true mean, as a censoring time is by definition less than an event time. and if we were to discard censored events, we would still get bias, because the observed data for a subject (minimum of censoring and survival time) depends on the survival time.to demonstrate this bias, we simulate a 1-year study with control and treatment groups comprising 100 subjects each having median survivals of 180 and 270 days, respectively, sampled from an exponential distribution (fig. 1a). for each subject, we randomly pick a drop-out time from the interval of 3–12 months and right censor the subject at the drop-out time if it was less than their survival time.despite the fact that 42 and 52 subjects were censored in the control and treatment groups, respectively, the km curves (fig. 3a) accurately estimate the groups’ median survival times: 179 days (95% ci 123–230) for the control and 266 days (95% ci 165–323) for the treatment group. if all event times correspond to observed events (no censoring), the median can be obtained by simply taking the middle event time.a, kaplan–meier (km) curves for the control (thick black line) and treatment (thick blue line) groups with censored events (orange circles). for each, estimated median survival (vertical dotted lines), true survival profile (thin lines) and true median survival (vertical lines) are shown. b, the same data as in a but with censored times treated as observed event times, where median survival times and their difference are grossly underestimated for both groups.another useful quantity offered by the km curve is the percentage survival to a meaningful time point, t. for some cancers, for example, t = 5 years is often used as the cutoff time for a subject being ‘cured’. for our example, the estimated 200 day survival rate is 54% (95% ci 46–68%) for the treatment group and 44% (95% ci 33–55%) for the control. this metric can be used even when the median survival time cannot be estimated (because the survival curve never drops to 50%). although we may be able to extrapolate the km curve by assuming a parametric survival distribution (fig. 1), we run the risk of biased estimates if our assumption is wrong. like many non-parametric methods, the km curve is unbiased regardless of the true survival distribution. however, it will have larger standard errors than an estimate based on a parametric survival distribution.if we mishandle censored times as observed event times, we underestimate the median survival as 134 days (95% ci 115–162) for control and 139 days (95% ci 132–166) days for treatment (fig. 3b). crucially, because a relatively large fraction of events are censored, we grossly underestimate the true 90-day difference between groups as 5 days. this mishandling will cause the most bias in the median when subjects are censored before the median survival time. if all of the censoring occurs after the median, mishandling will have little effect on the median, although it could have a large effect on other percentiles (for example, 75%).to test for a significant difference in median survival times, we can use a generalized gehan–wilcoxon rank-sum test5,6, which is a modification of the mann–whitney version of the test to account for censoring. briefly, the test compares pairs of observations between groups if neither time in the pair is censored, or if only one time in the pair is right censored and is observed later than the other (uncensored) time in the pair (because in this case the subject with the censored time lived longer). the test shows a significant difference (p = 0.043) between the control and treatment median survival times, whereas if we mistakenly treat censoring times as observed event times, we can no longer detect this difference (p = 0.11).another popular non-parametric test to compare survival curves is the log-rank test7. whereas the wilcoxon rank-sum test is particularly sensitive to differences in survival curves between groups early in time, the log-rank test is more sensitive to differences later in time.the km estimator is the most common approach for describing overall survival distributions and comparing them across populations or treatments. however, if our goal is to assess the effect of one or more risk factors on survival, we need to apply regression models. this will be the focus of the next column.lever, j., krzywinski, m. & altman, n. nat. methods 13, 541–542 (2016).cas article google scholar kaplan, e. l. & meier, p. j. am. stat. assoc. 53, 457–481 (1958).article google scholar rich, j. t. et al. otolaryngol. head neck surg. 143, 331–336 (2010).article google scholar altman, n. & krzywinski, m. nat. methods 15, 843–845 (2018).cas article google scholar krzywinski, m. & altman, n. nat. methods 11, 467–468 (2014).cas article google scholar gehan, e. a. biometrika 52, 203–223 (1965).cas article google scholar bland, j. m. & altman, d. g. br. med. j. 328, 1073 (2004).article google scholar download referencescenter for surgery & public health, department of surgery, brigham and women’s hospital, harvard medical school, boston, ma, usatanujit dey, stuart r. lipsitz, zara cooper & quoc-dien trinhcanada’s michael smith genome sciences centre, vancouver, british columbia, canadamartin krzywinskidepartment of statistics, the pennsylvania state university, state college, pa, usanaomi altmanyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to martin krzywinski.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdey, t., lipsitz, s.r., cooper, z. et al. survival analysis—time-to-event data and censoring. nat methods 19, 906–908 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01563-7download citationpublished: 04 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01563-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 