elucidating the interactions between serum protein-bound nanoparticles and cell-surface receptors typically operates on a per protein–receptor interaction basis. integration of omic approaches for testing thousands of interactions unbiasedly reveals important interactions that drive cellular uptake of nanoparticles.you have full access to this article via your institution.the ‘protein corona’ refers to a protein coating derived from the adsorption of proteins to the surface of nanoparticles upon exposure to biofluids, such as plasma1 and lung lining fluid2. composed of various types of proteins, this protein shell collectively influences the ability of the nanoparticle to enter mammalian cells3 and engage cell-surface receptors4. to understand the transport of therapeutic nanoparticles upon injection into the bloodstream, it is instructive to elucidate the interactions between the serum protein corona and receptors. conventional methods support the dissection of interactions one protein and one receptor at a time, under the guidance of hypotheses based on the properties of the serum sample and the nanoparticle type. however, these methods may overlook other protein–receptor interactions, and interrogation of all possible interactions can be laborious. in this issue of nature chemical biology, ngo et al.5 present an experimental framework (fig. 1) for dissecting thousands of protein corona–receptor interactions without requiring a hypothesis a priori. the authors conclusively winnow down the search space to the two most probable interactions that contribute to the cellular entry of serum-coated nanoparticles.top: initially, the composition of serum proteins bound onto the nanoparticle surface is determined by lc–ms/ms and ranked in descending order of their abundance in the corona. left: next, a pooled genome library of single-gene crispr–cas9 knockout cells is screened for their uptake of serum-coated nanoparticles. those knockout cells with the lowest nanoparticle uptake are then sequenced to identify the potential receptor involved in uptake. middle: finally, string enables the prediction of the most probable pairwise interactions between the most abundant serum proteins in the corona and the cell-surface receptors primarily involved in the cellular uptake of nanoparticles.in theory, the conjugation of targeting ligands that are specific for receptors on the cancer cell will enable therapeutic nanoparticles to selectively enter cancer cells rather than normal cells, thereby enhancing antitumor efficacy and reducing systemic toxicity. in reality, nanoparticles inevitably undergo rapid adsorption of serum proteins upon injection into the bloodstream6. the resultant serum corona may not only suppress the selectivity of the liganded nanoparticle for entering cancer cells4, but also endow it with a new biological identity that alters its mechanism of cellular entry. the question is whether a receptor exists to mediate the uptake of serum-coated nanoparticles. one approach to answering this is to determine the most abundant serum proteins in the corona and apply this insight to predict a candidate receptor. for example, because apolipoproteins bind to the low-density lipoprotein receptor (ldlr) and are abundant in the serum protein corona, one might hypothesize that the ldlr is a candidate for such a receptor. validation of its role in uptake required immunomapping7, pharmacological inhibition or gene silencing8. however, this one-protein-one-receptor approach not only is inefficient for testing all interactions, but also requires a hypothesis that factors in serum composition, nanoparticle surface chemistry and the cell type involved, complicating the discovery of unreported interactions.ngo et al.5 present an original experimental framework that integrates various chemical biology tools to decipher protein–receptor interactions in an unbiased manner by testing all possible interactions (fig. 1). the authors incubated gold nanoparticles in human serum and identified 219 different proteins bound by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (lc–ms/ms), revealing that complement proteins, apolipoproteins and immunoglobulins are most abundant. next, the authors used a crispr–cas9 lentiviral library to create u-87 mg glioma cells with 18,053 different single-gene knockouts spanning the human protein-coding genome, and then incubated these knockout cells with fluorescently labeled serum-coated gold nanoparticles to identify the knockouts that led to the most severe reduction in nanoparticle cellular uptake by flow cytometry. by high-throughput sequencing of the gene knockouts, they excluded genes that encode non-receptor proteins and eventually showed that the ldlr primarily mediates cellular uptake. then, using the search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (string; fig. 1) to predict the interactions of serum proteins in the corona with the ldlr, the authors identified eight proteins that bind to the ldlr, including apolipoprotein b-100 (apob) and complement component 8 (c8). moreover, the authors conducted competition, protein pull-down and protein depletion experiments to prove that apob–ldlr is a stronger interaction than c8–ldlr and that apob–ldlr is the major interaction for cellular uptake. lastly, they showcased the in vivo relevance of their data by intravenously injecting serum-coated nanoparticles into mice and demonstrating a positive correlation between the levels of nanoparticle accumulation and ldlr expression in organs.this work resolves the mystery of protein–receptor interactions of serum-coated nanoparticles. beside the already known apob–ldlr interaction7, ngo et al.5 also identified c8–ldlr as another probable interaction. future studies will need to clarify the role of c8 in the cellular processing of nanoparticles. in addition, the authors unbiasedly proved why other interactions are not statistically probable, but without having to experimentally validate each theoretically possible interaction. with the advent of personalized medicine, it remains to be seen whether these results will apply to other systems, as protein corona composition depends on nanoparticle surface chemistry, cell type and medical condition of human subjects from which serum samples are obtained9. moreover, by using nanoparticles without targeting ligands for known receptors, the authors showed that the serum protein corona enables cellular uptake via the ldlr. what about nanoparticles with ligands for targeting receptors on cancer cells? it will be informative to investigate to what extent such targeted nanoparticles will be redirected to enter cells via the ldlr upon administration into the blood circulation. furthermore, this work obviates the need to formulate a hypothesis, a boon when dealing with emerging bionanomaterials that may not have an apparent corresponding receptor, such as polymer-coated or cell-membrane-encased nanoparticles10. unraveling these mechanistic aspects of the protein corona is only a crucial first step, and we look forward to future studies that will enlighten us on how corona engineering enables delivery of nanomedicines. broadly, this work should inspire collaboration between nanomedicine and chemical biology communities.cedervall, t. et al. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 104, 2050–2055 (2007).cas article google scholar yin, b. et al. acs nano 13, 14048–14069 (2019).cas article google scholar chithrani, b. d. et al. nano lett. 6, 662–668 (2006).cas article google scholar salvati, a. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 8, 137–143 (2013).cas article google scholar ngo, w. et al. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01093-5 (2022).tenzer, s. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 8, 772–781 (2013).cas article google scholar lara, s. et al. acs nano 11, 1884–1893 (2017).cas article google scholar liu, y. et al. acs nano 15, 13871–13890 (2021).cas article google scholar hajipour, m. j. et al. biomater. sci. 2, 1210–1221 (2014).cas article google scholar xie, x. et al. nano lett. 20, 5228–5235 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of biomedical engineering, the chinese university of hong kong, shatin, new territories, hong kongcecilia ka wing chan, sze ho gwyneth lau & chung hang jonathan choiyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to chung hang jonathan choi.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionschan, c.k.w., lau, s.h.g. & choi, c.h.j. unbiased matchmaking. nat chem biol 18, 921–923 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01108-1download citationpublished: 11 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01108-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 