vitamin k was discovered by the biochemist henrik dam in 1936, and named after its role in promoting blood clotting, or koagulation, in dam’s native danish1. the vitamin is a type of molecule called a naphthoquinone. it can exist in multiple forms, but only one supports clotting — the ‘reduced hydroquinone’ form, known as vkh2. levels of vkh2 are maintained in the body by the enzyme vitamin k epoxide reductase (vkor), which is part of the major (canonical) vitamin k recycling pathway. writing in nature, mishima et al.2 pin down the identity of a different reductase enzyme that has a role in another crucial vitamin k recycling pathway.when blood clotting needs to be treated — for example, in response to a stroke — the anticoagulant warfarin is used to inhibit vkor, thus lowering levels of clot-promoting vkh2 in the blood (fig. 1a). although effective, warfarin therapy can easily lead to warfarin poisoning3, in which life-threatening bleeding arises owing to a lack of clotting. the standard clinical treatment for warfarin poisoning is administration of a high dose of vitamin k, which is reduced to vkh2 by a warfarin-resistant reductase, thereby enabling clotting3. until now, the identity of this ‘non-canonical’ reductase has been unknown.figure 1 | vitamin k recycling. a, in the body, ingested vitamin k (vk) is reduced by the enzyme vitamin k epoxide reductase (vkor) to produce a reduced hydroquinone form of vitamin k, vkh2. this form of vitamin k acts as a cofactor for the enzyme γ-glutamyl carboxylase (ggcx), which modifies several clotting factors to promote blood clotting, generating vitamin k epoxide (vko) from vkh2 as a by-product. it can then be recycled back to vk in steps that also involve vkor. the drug warfarin inhibits vkor, blocking the cycle to prevent blood clotting. b, mishima et al.2 report that the enzyme fsp1 can also reduce vk to promote clotting, but is not inhibited by warfarin. c, they also find that vkh2 produced through this pathway eliminates radicals called lipid peroxyl radicals (loo•), which promote a type of cell death known as ferroptosis. the interaction produces intermediates called lipid hydroperoxides (looh) and recycles vkh2 back to vk.the group that performed the current study was already familiar with one candidate reductase, the enzyme fsp1. the researchers had previously shown fsp1 to be a suppressor of ferroptosis4 — a form of cell death triggered when lipids are damaged by radicals to form lipid peroxides. the group had demonstrated that fsp1 eliminates lipid radicals from cells using the molecule ubiquinone (coq10) as a substrate. in the current study, mishima et al. investigated whether fsp1 could also reduce vitamin k, which shares structural similarities with coq10.indeed, the authors found that fsp1 reduces vitamin k and is insensitive to warfarin. fsp1 was necessary to protect against lethal brain haemorrhage in mice that had warfarin poisoning and received high-dose vitamin k treatment. moreover, warfarin-treated human cells had only a minimal capacity to reduce vitamin k levels if they lacked fsp1. thus, fsp1 is the long-sought mediator of non-canonical vitamin k reduction (fig. 1b). read the paper: a non-canonical vitamin k cycle is a potent ferroptosis suppressorthis finding indicates that fsp1 should be a consideration when managing thrombosis and other clotting disorders. genetic variants in the gene that encodes fsp1 have been identified in people5,6, but their effect on fsp1 function has not been characterized. variation in fsp1 activity across the human population could reduce the effectiveness of warfarin in people for whom fsp1 is more active. by contrast, people who exhibit low fsp1 activity could require more vitamin k to combat warfarin poisoning. future studies examining the interaction between an individual’s fsp1 function, dietary vitamin k intake and warfarin sensitivity are warranted7.next, mishima et al. investigated whether vitamin k could also act as a substrate for fsp1-mediated peroxide detoxification. a second enzyme, glutathione peroxidase 4 (gpx4), also eliminates lipid peroxides, so the authors used a series of gpx4-deficient cell and mouse models to negate this pathway’s influence in their experiments. vitamin k is ingested in one of three forms — as naturally occurring phylloquinone (pk) or menaquinone (mk4), or as the synthetic variant menadione — and the authors found that all three could inhibit ferroptosis in gpx4-deficient cells. importantly, fsp1 reductase activity was crucial for the anti-ferroptotic effect of vitamin k, both in vitro and in vivo. the authors demonstrated that fsp1 reduces vitamin k to vkh2, which acts as an antioxidant, mopping up radicals. this prevents lipid peroxidation and regenerates vitamin k (fig. 1c). building a chemical blueprint for human bloodintriguingly, mishima et al. discovered that the mk4 form of vitamin k is better at removing peroxides and suppressing ferroptosis than is coq10. given that fsp1 can use both, an obvious next question is which is the preferred substrate in vivo? the authors did not examine this directly, but there are some clues from evolution. vitamin k serves as a predominant electron carrier in bacteria and plants, whereas primordial oxygenation of the atmosphere seems to have selected for coq10 in animals, owing to its higher redox potential and abundance8. this information suggests that coq10 is probably the preferred substrate in animals in vivo, and that administration of high-dose vitamin k has the potential to suppress ferroptosis as a therapeutic strategy.ferroptosis causes considerable harm when blood supply is lost from a tissue9 and subsequently restored — a damaging phenomenon called ischaemia–reperfusion injury (iri). in a final set of experiments, mishima et al. showed that vitamin k supplementation suppressed ferroptosis and prevented tissue-damaging inflammation in mice subjected to iri in the liver or kidneys. furthermore, vitamin k prevented ferroptosis in neurons, demonstrating its broad action across tissues. although the focus of these studies was on the ferroptosis-suppressing activity of vitamin k in the context of fsp1, the results also raise the question of whether vkor can promote ferroptosis suppression in certain contexts.these findings suggest the exciting potential for using vitamin k supplementation as a potent means of warding off iri in people at high risk of ischaemia — those who have cardiovascular disease, for instance. vitamin k is well tolerated, and no toxicity is found with administration of the pk or mk4 forms for treating warfarin poisoning. however, it is administered as an acute dose, and the effects of long-term administration have not been determined. clinical trials to test this application are now needed — and because vitamin k is already given to people, these could occur very soon.