a ‘dual-ligand passivation system’ is designed and synthesized to functionalize colloidal quantum dots to realize ultra-high resolution patterns by direct photolithography.you have full access to this article via your institution.first synthesized in 1993 (ref. 1), monodisperse colloidal quantum dots (qds) exhibit intriguing physical and chemical properties, such as size-dependent and narrow emission wavelength, controllable electronic transport and tuneable surface state. among the applications of colloidal qds, light emitting displays is one of the most commercially promising directions. currently, colloidal qds can reach near-unity photoluminescence quantum yield (plqy) and the corresponding qd light emitting diodes (qleds) can achieve high external quantum efficiency (eqe), approaching to theoretical limit. however, fabricating pixelated qd arrays remains challenging, but it is a key step for the practical application of qled displays. now, writing in nature nanotechnology, hahm et al. have designed a series of ligands that enables a non-destructive direct patterning process of qd arrays without compromising their optical or carrier transport characteristics2.nowadays, ink-jet printing and transfer printing are the most widely adopted technologies for large-area fabrication of devices3,4. when applied to the qd patterning process, however, they tend to introduce spurious effects resulting in not well-defined boundaries, especially for small qd pixels, and degradation of electroluminescence performance. for example, due to the droplet size, print angle of the nozzle and alignment accuracy (around 5 μm), ink-jet printing is not suitable for the preparation of qd arrays with pixel densities above 400 part per inch (ppi); for the transfer printing process, it is difficult to pick up qds cleanly on the edge of the stamp because of insufficient pressure at the edges5. therefore, photolithography, as a kind of high precision machining technology, has been investigated to fabricate qd pixels with desired shape and size.in 2017, the concept of photoresist-free, direct photolithography technology was firstly proposed along with a general chemical approach to obtain functional inorganic nanomaterial pixels based on in-situ ligands reaction6. in the subsequent years, this concept developed rapidly. different mechanisms for direct photolithography of qds were proposed and implemented. one of the most effective schemes is to synthesize photopatternable ligands by integrating the hole-transporting triphenylamine and uv crosslinkable groups to replace the original ligands7. alternatively, a photosensitive crosslinker with two azide end groups can be used to realize direct patterning of qds without exchanging surface ligands8. subsequently, another kind of crosslinker which can work at the region of uv-a (365 nm) with low doses (<50 mj·cm–2) was reported9.in their work, hahm et al. design a series of photocrosslinkable ligands based on benzophenone to endow the qds with photosensitive ability, omitting any other additives2. by combing the photocrosslinkable ligands with dispersing ligands (determine the solubility of qds in the desired solvent) in a certain proportion, a ‘dual-ligand passivation system’ was successfully established, achieving a non-destructive direct qd patterning process without compromising the optical or carrier transport characteristics. figure 1a illustrates how the photocrosslinkable ligands works. briefly, when irradiated by uv light, the carbonyl group of benzophenone moiety in the photocrosslinkable ligands will abstract a hydrogen atom and then transform into ketyl radical, finally forming a covalent bond with the alkyl part of adjacent ligands. figure 1b shows the schematic diagram of the direct photolithography process for obtaining rgb (red, green and blue) primary colour arrays.a, the reaction mechanism between photocrosslinkable ligands and dispersing ligands. under uv irradiation, the carbonyl group of benzophenone moiety will abstract a hydrogen atom and then transform into ketyl radical, finally forming a covalent bond with the alkyl part of adjacent ligands. b, direct photolithography process for obtaining rgb primary colour arrays.hahm et al. achieved a resolution of the qd patterns greater than 15,000 ppi, and demonstrated fluorescent images with multiple colours in vertical stacks of qd patterns, indicating that the direct photolithography technology based on their dual-ligand passivation system could be used for near-eye hyper-realistic qled displays. systematic micromorphology and electrical characterizations reveal that the patterned qds exhibit low surface roughness and leading electroluminescence performance, even after crosslinking and rinsing processes. in addition, the researchers also proved that their direct photolithography technology can be used in ink-jet printing, as it protects the qds from liquid infiltration of subsequent solution processes. finally, they prototyped a qled display with 10 x 10 rgb pixel arrays to show the potential for commercial applications.from a scientific research perspective, this study expands the application range of qd materials. by precisely choosing the functionalized ligands, the optical and chemical properties of qds can be adjusted to meet specific requirements. the corresponding direct photolithography technique can also be used to construct complex qd patterns with required fluorescence wavelength for various applications.from a commercial application perspective, pixel miniaturization is an inevitable trend in the development of display technologies. advances in direct photolithography qd patterning will promote the fabrication for near-eye microdisplay devices, such as augmented reality (ar) and virtual reality (vr) equipment with resolution above thousands ppi, with straightforward implications to the metaverse or other virtual application scenarios10. furthermore, it might be possible to combine different luminescence techniques together. specifically, pixelated qds can be combined with oled to improve colour accuracy and provide a wide gamut, while red and green qds can be deposited on blue microled chips to achieve full-colour qd-microled. finally, it is worth noting that pixelated qled devices still have room for improvement: the homogeneity among different pixels, stability and lifetime, leakage through the charge transport layers are all aspects that would need further optimization, most likely by developing novel functional ligands and photopatternable charge transport layer materials.murray, c. b., norris, d. j. & bawendi, m. g. j. am. chem. soc. 115, 8706–8715 (1993).cas article google scholar hahm, d. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01182-5 (2022).article google scholar xiang, c. et al. nat. commun. 11, 1646 (2020).article google scholar meng, t. et al. nat. photonics 16, 297–303 (2022).cas article google scholar choi, m. k. et al. nat. commun. 6, 7149 (2015).cas article google scholar wang, y., fedin, i., zhang, h. & talapin, d. v. science 357, 385–388 (2017).cas article google scholar ko, j. et al. acs appl. mater. interfaces 12, 42153–42160 (2020).article google scholar yang, j. et al. nat. commun. 11, 1–9 (2020).cas article google scholar lu, s. et al. angew. chemie int. ed. e202202633 (2022).liu, z. et al. light sci. appl. 9, 1–23 (2020).article google scholar download referencesdivision of functional materials and nanodevices, ningbo institute of materials technology and engineering, chinese academy of sciences, ningbo, chinajunpeng fan & lei qianlaboratory of advanced nano-optoelectronic materials and devices, qianwan institute of cnitech, ningbo, chinajunpeng fan & lei qianyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lei qian.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfan, j., qian, l. quantum dot patterning by direct photolithography. nat. nanotechnol. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01187-0download citationpublished: 11 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01187-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 