the genetic variants that increase the risk of disease do so by exerting effects on rna. variants can alter the amount of rna produced from a given gene. they can alter the transcribed rna sequence itself, leading to changes either in the amino-acid sequence of the encoded protein or in how much of the rna is removed through ‘splicing’ before it is translated into protein. finally, variants can influence whether rna molecules undergo a-to-i rna editing1 — a process in which a subunit of rna is changed from adenosine (a) to inosine (i). writing in nature, li et al.2 present a comprehensive analysis of the effects of genetic variants on a-to-i rna editing. their work provides new insights into the mechanisms by which genetic variants mediate the risk of some immune-related diseases.a-to-i rna editing disrupts the formation of double-stranded rna molecules. these molecules occur naturally, either when both a protein-coding gene and its complementary dna are transcribed and the transcripts form a duplex, or when non-coding, repetitive transcripts form duplexes with themselves. conversion of a to i by the enzyme adar disrupts the rna duplex. but unedited rna duplexes are bound by the sensor protein mda5 which, by mistaking them for viral rna, triggers an immune reaction against the body’s own cells that can lead to autoimmune disease (fig. 1).figure 1 | varying risk for autoimmune disease. a, some regions of the genome give rise to rna that forms a double-stranded duplex. this rna can be edited by the enzyme adar, which converts a subunit of the rna called adenosine into inosine (not shown), disrupting the duplex and preventing the viral-sensor protein mda5 from binding. b, li et al.2 provide evidence that some genetic variants are associated with lower levels of this type of rna editing, perhaps because adar does not bind the rna so strongly. unedited rna duplexes are bound by mda5, which wrongly recognizes the rna as ‘non-self’ and triggers immune responses. thus, these genetic variants are also associated with a higher risk of developing some immune-related diseases.the extent to which variation in rna editing, mediated by genetic variation, affects the risk of autoimmune diseases has been unclear. although this question has been touched on before3, li and colleagues took a broader approach, studying genomes and rna sequences from 49 human tissues from 838 people, using data from a project called gtex4. the authors analysed how patterns of rna editing varied between individuals, to identify cis genetic variants (those located close to editing sites) that are associated with rna editing. these variants are dubbed editing quantitative trait loci (edqtls).the researchers found that the edqtls are largely different from the variants that regulate gene expression or splicing. they are clustered in specific genomic features, such as regions that encode a-to-i editing sites, and the authors provide evidence that the variants might alter the strength with which adar can bind to rna. read the paper: rna editing underlies genetic risk of common inflammatory diseasesli et al. next examined the overlap between their edqtls and variants that other studies have associated with autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases. they found that, in general, edqtls associated with decreased levels of rna editing confer a higher-than-average risk of autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases. this directionality contrasts with the behaviour of risk variants for these diseases that alter gene expression and splicing. such variants can either increase or decrease protein function, depending on the part that the protein plays in the disease.finally, the authors zoomed in to identify specific edqtls that bring about disease-associated changes in editing, and found that 33% of these genomic regions encode proteins. it is intriguing to think that, at these loci, it might not be changes in the function of the protein that contributes to disease risk (as is often assumed to be the case), but rather the formation of double-stranded rna that leads to activation of the innate immune system. the function of the encoded protein might even be completely irrelevant for the disease.however, individual genetic variants often have effects on multiple genes, as well as on different layers of regulation (that is, on expression, splicing and editing). although the authors used careful analysis to try to reduce such confounding factors, they cannot be completely avoided. for example, around 20% of the genetic variants associated with changes in rna editing were also associated with altered gene-expression levels or splicing. this means that, for any given locus, it is difficult to demonstrate with certainty that disease risk is mediated through one specific type of regulation. further complicating matters, many genetic effects on gene expression or splicing are restricted to highly specific cell types or cell states5. consequently, variants that seem to be specifically associated with rna editing in the gtex data set might turn out to control gene expression or splicing in cell types not included in gtex, such as immune cells. human genetic variants identified that affect covid susceptibility and severitybecause li and colleagues focused on cis variants, a key next question is whether trans variants, which have broad effects on rna editing across the genome, might also have a part to play in the risk of autoimmune disease. if so, does this effect involve innate immune activation triggered by the formation of double-stranded rna, as the authors propose for cis edqtls? perhaps large-scale meta-analyses of genomes and rna sequences such as those conducted by the eqtlgen consortium6 could help to provide an answer.li and colleagues’ study reaffirms the value of open data sharing — this work would not have been possible without publicly available data sets. at the same time, it highlights the limitations of current data-sharing systems. although smaller data sets covering immune cell types exist (for example, those documented in refs 7 and 8), obtaining access to many smaller studies is a bureaucratic maze that few are willing to navigate. to increase the pace of science, researchers need to come up with mechanisms to reduce these administrative hurdles while protecting the privacy of study participants.li and colleagues’ study highlights the importance of considering all possible mechanisms by which a genetic variant might influence disease risk, and raises the intriguing prospect that at some loci, the genetic effect might be entirely mediated by rna. although these individual loci probably have small effects on disease risk, more loci are likely to be discovered as autoimmune genetic studies increase in scale. thus, researchers and clinicians should be mindful of this possibility when prioritizing new therapeutic targets for autoimmune disease.