pufin id is a danish start-up commercializing anti-counterfeiting technology based on nanoscale photophyics.you have full access to this article via your institution.it is estimated that last year, one-in-four americans purchased a fake product unknowingly, with footwear, clothing, leather goods and electrical equipment being the most targeted items. globally, the trade of forged goods generates a business of about half a trillion us dollars. various documentations and certifications can be used to help customers always get what they have paid for, but these can be forged with relative ease. pufin id (https://pufin.id/) — a danish start-up — now offers a potential solution: using physically unclonable functions (or pufs) to generate a code that it is impossible to clone and can thus uniquely identify a single product.the code is generated by simple spin-coating of a zeolite crystals solution onto a support, like glass or plastics. these crystals form a pattern, visible as white spots, that can then be associated with all sorts of information through a cloud-based database. the crucial part of the technology is that the preparation of the pattern is a stochastic process, making it a real puf. this means that the pattern is different every time the process is repeated. not even the manufacturer itself can produce two identical patterns, let alone a forger.the pattern can then be embedded in or grafted onto the product to protect. all the information that the manufacturer wishes to be associated with the single item (characteristics, insurance, traceability) are stored in a cloud-based database. this information can be accessed by the customer by scanning the pattern with a smartphone and using the dedicated app (see image) (arppe-tabbara, r. et al.acs appl. mater. interfaces11, 6475–6482; 2019). thomas just sørensen, founder and chief scientific officer of pufin id, says that they are yet to encounter false positive results with their puf technology.nevertheless, for extra security, there is the possibility to add a second stochastic process when generating the pattern. this involves exchanging the cations of the zeolite with three lanthanide ions, before the spin-coating step. when illuminated, each lanthanide emits a sharp peak in the red, green and blue region, supplementing the pattern with a colour code. this strategy achieves an astounding encoding power in the order of 10104 μm2, but to read the puf one needs a microscope (carro-temboury, m.r. et al.sci. adv.4, e1701384; 2018).the size of the tags produced by pufin id can be adapted to the product and can be as small as 1 mm2. they can be embedded in various materials using standard coating technologies, or be applied as stickers; the only requirement is that they need to be accessible to a phone camera. simple tags can be produced using roll-to-roll fabrication. sørensen explains that the company can guarantee stability of the tag up to five years, but they have done research that extends it to 20 years on noble metals, and 30 years on wood. the start-up is also currently working to optimize the image reading algorithm using a neural network approach to minimize computational time, and to develop scaled-up methodologies without losing the randomness of the features.pufin id is a 3-year old deep tech start-up established thanks to the proof-of-concept work carried out with support from innovation fund denmark and incubator fund from the university of copenhagen, where sørensen is a professor. they currently employ ~20 people. they have customers in the luxury goods and the automotive sectors. their main patent can be found here: https://patents.google.com/patent/wo2018134405a1.nature nanotechnology https://www.nature.com/nnanoalberto moscatelliyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to alberto moscatelli.reprints and permissionsmoscatelli, a. physically unclonable functions fight forgery. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 818 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01194-1download citationpublished: 10 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01194-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 