a series of emergent electronic orders are observed in an antiparallel twisted wse2 bilayer. the discoveries provide a powerful platform for simulating quantum phenomena in strongly correlated materials.you have full access to this article via your institution.a recent breakthrough in quantum materials lies in the twist-angle controlled stacking of two-dimensional materials1. when two layers of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides with different lattice constants are stacked together with aligned crystal orientations, a moiré potential arises with a new lattice constant tens of times larger than the constituent atomic lattice constant2. for an electron residing in such a superlattice, the repulsion energy from other electrons within the same potential well often dominates the kinetic energy it gains when hopping between different potential wells. as a result, the electrons become localized in the superlattice and the material becomes insulating even though the moiré band is only half-filled from the single-particle perspective3,4,5. this is similar to the mott–hubbard physics originally observed in strongly correlated materials and now we have an exciting new opportunity to simulate it as well as many related exotic quantum phenomena in a highly tuneable system.in a work recently published in nature nanotechnology, yang xu et al. demonstrated that such hubbard physics can also be observed in a twisted homo-bilayer of tungsten diselenide (wse2) ref. 6. unlike hetero-bilayers, the homo-bilayer has a moiré superlattice constant determined by the twisted angle, and the electronic bands in the two layers are almost degenerate. as a result, a small electric field between two layers can tip the energy balance and change the layer where electrons are located, adding a new layer degree of freedom to an already extremely physics-rich system. by monitoring the optical response of the homo-bilayer and a nearby sensing layer, the authors reveal multiple competing electronic orders, including excitonic insulator, charge transfer insulator, and layer-selective mott-insulator. some of these previously unobserved phases exhibit distinct electrical and magnetic properties which can be continuously tuned by various experimental knobs, thus providing a new platform to study emergent phenomena such as the magneto–electric effect and kondo effect.figure 1a illustrates one of the exotic phases found by the authors — an excitonic insulator. when only half of the moiré sites in the top and bottom layers are filled, one expects a conductive phase if there were no interlayer correlation effects, since the free charges can always find empty neighbouring sites to hop to. experimentally, the system is found to be insulating in this condition (v = 1, p = 0), because the electron in one layer is bound to the hole in the other layer through a strong coulomb attraction, forming an exciton. as the exciton flow carries no electrical current, the bilayer becomes insulating as a whole. in the meantime, when a vertical electric field is applied, this exciton insulator can be tuned into a mott insulator for the following reason.a, charge configuration of an excitonic insulator with a filling factor ν = 1. the layer-unpolarized holes (red) localize at a moiré site of one-layer bond with the electrons (blue) at the same moiré site in another layer, forming interlayer excitons. b, tuneable electrical polarizability χe and magnetic susceptibility χm. c, spin-charge configuration of an antiferromagnetic insulator at ν = 2, p = 1. both mx and mm sites are occupied.since the homo-bilayer in this work are close to being antiparallel stacked, the electronic bands in the two layers are almost degenerate in energy but have opposite spins. therefore, the two layers are not sufficiently hybridized and a small electric field can transfer the charge from one layer to the other, which can be characterized by an out-of-plane electrical polarizability χe. interestingly, χe is found to have an unconventional dependence on doping (fig. 1b). whenever the doping density crosses an integer filling, a step jump occurs to the polarizability. when ν <1, the polarizability is more than one order of magnitude larger than that when ν>2, which is close to the classical capacitor limit. more theoretical studies are needed to understand such unusual behaviour.the electrical field and doping can also dramatically change the magnetic properties of the bilayer. by measuring the magnetic circular dichroism of the optical resonance, the authors found the magnetic susceptibility (χm) has a non-monotonic dependence on doping. at p = 1 (all the charges reside in one layer), χm becomes the largest when every moiré site has one carrier. when the doping becomes doubled, the magnetic susceptibility disappears. such abnormal behaviour can also be seen if both layers are doped. in the p = 0 limit, the magnetic susceptibility is maximized when the filling is equal to 2.the mechanism behind such an interesting magneto-electric coupling is the emergence of an antiferromagnetic order in a honeycomb lattice, as illustrated in the right panel. at ν = 2, p = 1 not only the mx site but also the mm site, which is the second-lowest energy minimum in the moiré superlattice7, are occupied. the spin–spin interaction drives the ground state to be a neel-type antiferromagnetic insulator as the temperature is below 9k. as a result, the magnetic susceptibility vanishes when a spin gap is formed in the antiferromagnetic state.the emergence of an antiferromagnetic order highlights the honeycomb-like moiré potential in the twisted homo-bilayer, in contrast to the triangle lattice previously studied in the hetero-bilayer, where the geometric frustration quenches the spin order. if properly doped, superconductivity could stabilize in a bipartite honeycomb moiré lattice. when the filling factor is between 1 and 2, experimental observation suggests a layer selective insulator, where local magnetic moments form in one layer while the rest the of charges remain itinerant in the other layer. in the future, such a system can be leveraged to study how the itinerant electrons interact with the local moment, as in kondo materials8,9. as more degrees of freedom and tuneability are harnessed in 2d van der waals structures, we expect moiré materials to continue serving as a powerful simulator for exploring novel quantum phenomena.andrei, e. y. et al. nat. rev. mat. 6, 201–206.hongyi, y. et al. science adv. 3, e1701696 (2017).article google scholar fengcheng, w. et al. phys. rev. lett. 121, 026402 (2018).article google scholar regan, e. c. et al. nature 579, 359–363 (2020).cas article google scholar tang, y. et al. nature 579, 353–358 (2020).cas article google scholar yang, x. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01180-7 (2020).article google scholar zhang, y., yuan, n. f. & fu, l. phys. rev. b 102, 201115 (2020).cas article google scholar kumar, ajesh et al. preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2110.11962 (2021).dalal, a. & ruhman, j. phys. rev. lett. 3, 043173 (2021).cas google scholar download referenceswe are supported by the max planck–ubc–utokyo centre for quantum materials, the canada first research excellence fund, the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada, and the canada research chairs program (z.y.).department of physics and astronomy, the university of british columbia, vancouver, bc, canadadongyang yang & ziliang yequantum matter institute, the university of british columbia, vancouver, bc, canadadongyang yang & ziliang yeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ziliang ye.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsyang, d., ye, z. quantum simulator comes in pairs. nat. nanotechnol. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01191-4download citationpublished: 02 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01191-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 