chikungunya virion assembly is elucidated using cryo-electron tomography to reveal how antibodies protect hosts by blocking virion release from virus-infected cells.you have full access to this article via your institution.alphaviruses, including chikungunya virus (chikv), are positive-strand rna viruses that can cause severe neurological or arthritogenic diseases in humans. the structures of several alphaviruses have been solved using cryo-electron microscopy, revealing a spherical virion that is completely covered with an ordered array of envelope protein spikes (fig. 1)1,2. each envelope spike comprises three copies of the viral e1 and e2 glycoproteins that mediate cellular membrane fusion and attachment, respectively, and are recognized by protective antibodies elicited by infection. the envelope protein shell of the virion is tethered to the viral membrane and interacts with the underlying nucleocapsid (nc) core, resulting in a virion with two distinct protein layers. the nc has an icosahedral organization similar to the envelope proteins on the virion surface. the steps involved in assembling ‘two-layered’ alphavirus virions have been debated3. alphavirus assembly and budding occur at the plasma membrane of virus-infected cells. before assembly, e1 and e2 glycoproteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum and trafficked through the secretory pathway to the cell surface. viral capsid proteins assemble in the cytoplasm into an nc and then colocalize with viral envelope proteins at the plasma membrane via interactions between capsid proteins and a conserved motif in the cytoplasmic tail of the e2 glycoprotein. the driving force for the organization of the two icosahedral layers of the virus particle and its release from cells was unclear until now. writing in nature microbiology, chmielewski and colleagues4 report how they used cutting-edge structural techniques to capture alphaviruses in the act of budding, resolving in fine detail the structural steps involved in forming the virion and revealing the mechanism underlying the activity of an important class of antiviral antibodies.left: the icosahedral arrangement of trimer envelope protein spikes on a chikv virion. while spike trimers may assemble into multiple structures in virus-infected cells, pentagons of envelope protein trimers are uniquely found at the sites of viral assembly and free virions. right: a cross-section of chikv reveals the outer layer of spike envelope trimers, the viral membrane and an inner layer composed of capsid proteins of the nc. figure adapted from ref. 7, under a creative commons licence cc by 4.0; left panel, emd-5577.cryo-electron tomography (cryo-et) provides three-dimensional structural information on complex molecules by acquiring, aligning and averaging a series of sequentially tilted two-dimensional images from thin, frozen samples5. to identify alphavirus assembly and budding mechanisms, chmielewski and colleagues used cryo-et to capture intermediates in the morphogenesis of the chikv virion in cultured cells. they analysed almost 2,000 individual chikv assembly events and defined 12 sequential steps in virion assembly. enumeration of viral complexes at each step identified a limited number of particles at the early and intermediate stages of assembly. the majority of particles were grouped into the late steps of the assembly process in which the glycoprotein shell is largely complete. this distribution suggests that assembly starts quickly but slows as virions approach the budding step. the images confirmed the presence of preformed nc structures in the cytoplasm, but showed that these structures lack the uniform, icosahedral conformation that is needed to serve as a template for envelope protein organization. instead, they identified a collaborative process, in which interactions between envelope spikes and ncs at the plasma membrane result in the concerted ordering of both the outer spikes of the virion and the inner nc core. in the absence of an nc core, lateral interactions between envelope spikes are sufficient to promote self-assembly into higher-order structures, including planar sheets and tubular structures, but assemblies of spike pentagons, such as those found on infectious virions, were only observed at sites of virion assembly with an associated nc structure.antibodies can block virus infection at multiple stages in the replication cycle, including viral egress1. for anti-alphavirus antibodies, it has been proposed that antibody-mediated crosslinking of the glycoproteins on the cell surface prevents virion assembly and release6. the cryo-et studies of chmielewski and colleagues suggest that antibody binding increases the distance between neighbouring spikes, which prevents the lateral spike–spike interactions that are needed to initiate the assembly of virions into icosahedral structures4. these studies were carried out using the well-characterized anti-chikv antibody, c9, which has previously been shown to block virion egress by a process dependent on bivalent engagement with both arms of the antibody molecule1.the authors’ findings raise questions about the features that antibodies require to prevent virus egress. many anti-alphavirus antibodies block egress, including broadly reactive antibodies capable of binding more than one viral species, those with potent or no neutralizing activity, and those that bind structurally distinct regions of the e1 or e2 glycoproteins7,8. bivalent interactions are not required for all antibodies that block egress8. alphaviruses have broad cellular tropism, and the degree of antibody egress blockade may vary among different types of target cell. it remains unclear whether the mechanism of action of all egress-blocking antibodies is the same, as well as whether they are shared across closely and distantly related alphaviruses.antibodies can also clear virus-infected cells by multiple distinct mechanisms mediated by interactions between invariant domains of antibody molecules (the fragment crystallizable (fc) domain) and antibody-binding receptors on immune cells (fc receptors) as well as the complement component, c1q (ref. 7). antibody-mediated crosslinking of envelope spikes facilitates the clustering of antigens on the cell surface, which is crucial for initiating cell-mediated functions, including antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (adcc)7. antibody c9 is a potent inducer of adcc6, but other anti-alphavirus antibodies that inhibit virion release do not necessarily induce robust cell-mediated clearance or complement deposition in vitro9. additionally, the presence of factors that crosslink antibodies, such as c1q, may enhance the efficacy of antibody-mediated egress blockade. understanding the characteristics of antibodies that tune their ability to contribute to these antiviral functions has substantial translational value.previous studies with viruses that bud from the plasma membrane, including influenza virus and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv-1), have identified different mechanisms of antibody-mediated egress inhibition, including virion aggregation and the tethering of virions to the surface of infected cells10. chmielewski and colleagues define the steps required for the assembly of an icosahedral virion, and show how antibodies can directly inhibit the morphogenesis of the virus particle independent of their ability to inhibit infection by the released virion.by understanding the conformation and presentation of the spike proteins on the surface of infected cells, antivirals and therapeutic ‘wedges’ can be designed to target lateral interactions during virion assembly, and thereby reduce virion release.jin, j. et al. cell rep. 13, 2553–2564 (2015).cas article google scholar powell, l. a. et al. cell host microbe 28, 699–711 (2020).cas article google scholar brown, r. s. et al. viruses 10, 89 (2018).article google scholar chmielewski, d. et al. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01164-2 (2022).marx, v. nat. methods 15, 575–578 (2018).cas article google scholar jin, j. et al. cell host microbe 24, 417–428 (2018).cas article google scholar jin, j. & simmons, g. viruses 11, 305 (2019).cas article google scholar kim, a. s. et al. cell 184, 4414–4429 (2021).cas article google scholar williamson, l. e. et al. cell 184, 4430–4446 (2021).cas article google scholar dufloo, j. et al. nat. commun. 13, 630 (2022).cas article google scholar download referenceslaboratory of viral diseases, national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, national institutes of health, bethesda, md, usajulie m. fox & theodore c. piersonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to julie m. fox or theodore c. pierson.j.m.f. has received royalties from themis biosciences and chemobio diagnostics for licensure of anti-alphavirus antibodies. t.c.p. declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfox, j.m., pierson, t.c. chikungunya virus assembly and egress. nat microbiol 7, 1112–1113 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01190-0download citationpublished: 02 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01190-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 