iron filings dropped on a sheet of paper and given a good shake move about haphazardly without settling into any particular arrangement. if this process is repeated with a bar magnet placed underneath the paper, the filings arrange themselves into elliptical patterns, revealing the otherwise invisible magnetic lines of force. the filings behave in this way because iron is a ‘soft’ magnetic material: it is easily magnetized when a weak magnetic field is applied, and easily demagnetized when the field is removed or reversed slightly1,2. read the paper: a mechanically strong and ductile soft magnet with extremely low coercivitysoft magnetic materials are used in a range of everyday applications, including transformers, generators and motors3. a key property of these materials is coercivity, which quantifies the strength of the reverse magnetic field needed for complete demagnetization — the coercivity must be low to reduce energy loss in applications4. for certain applications, soft magnetic materials must also be strong, malleable and tough. however, mechanical and soft magnetic properties are often inversely correlated5, so that a compromise must be reached between low coercivity and high mechanical strength. writing in nature, han et al.6 report a remarkable alloy that avoids this compromise.strength is the ability of a material to resist permanent deformation, which in crystalline metals occurs by the motion of defects called dislocations. obstacles that ‘pin’ dislocations by impeding their motion therefore enhance strength. among the most effective of obstacles are precipitates — particles of a new phase that form within the solid solution (the matrix) of an alloy when the solubility limit of some of the constituent elements of the matrix is exceeded. precipitates that are hard, closely spaced and occupy a large fraction of the alloy’s volume are especially good at pinning7. unfortunately, precipitates also tend to pin the walls between magnetic domains8 — regions in which the magnetic moments of neighbouring atoms have a preferred alignment, which causes the magnetization within a domain to be uniform in magnitude and direction.soft magnetic materials contain many magnetic domains. when a material is in the demagnetized state, the alignment of the magnetic moments varies from one domain to the next. but, on magnetization, the magnetic moments of all domains align along the externally applied magnetic field. this occurs mainly through the movement of domain walls, which allows favourably oriented domains to grow and unfavourably oriented ones to shrink.if strength-enhancing precipitates interfere with domain-wall motion, then high applied fields are needed to reach the maximum possible (saturation) magnetization of the material, and high reverse fields are needed to demagnetize it completely. this results in energy losses during magnetization–demagnetization cycles owing to hysteresis — a phenomenon in which the variation of the magnetization of the material with respect to the applied field strength differs during magnetization and demagnetization. strain solves switch hitch for an antiferromagnetic materialhan et al. now show that it is possible to decouple the opposing effects of precipitates in a multicomponent alloy so that the benefits for strength do not come at the expense of coercivity. the alloy’s matrix has a cubic lattice containing mostly iron, cobalt and nickel atoms, with small amounts of aluminium and tantalum. by heating this material to 1,173 kelvin, the authors produced precipitates that have a different lattice structure to the matrix and that occupy 55% of the total volume of the alloy. the precipitates are enriched in nickel, tantalum and aluminium compared with the matrix, but are depleted in iron and cobalt, which makes them paramagnetic — they do not support a magnetic state. by varying the heating time, the authors altered the size of the precipitated particles from small (24 nanometres), to medium (91 nm) and large (255 nm). the medium-sized precipitates produce the best combination of high strength, high ductility (and therefore toughness) and low coercivity.the authors’ alloy is tougher than many other reported multicomponent alloys. furthermore, its coercivity is comparable to those of the most widely used silicon steels (which are specifically processed to have low coercivities), and it is significantly tougher than many other soft magnetic materials (fig. 1). it also has a higher electrical resistivity than commercially available soft magnetic materials. this is desirable because it lowers the electrical ‘eddy’ currents that form in conductors placed in a changing magnetic field (as in transformer cores, for instance), and that are the dominant cause of energy losses when the field switches back and forth at high frequencies3.figure 1 | comparison of the properties of soft magnetic materials (smms). materials that can be magnetized and demagnetized by weak magnetic fields are said to exhibit soft magnetism. coercivity quantifies the strength of the reverse magnetic field needed to completely demagnetize an smm. certain applications require tough smms that have low coercivity, but such materials have been lacking. han et al.6 report an alloy that has comparable coercivity to that of other types of low-coercivity smm, but is much tougher. here, the metric of toughness (reported in units of gigapascal%) is the product of two other material properties: room-temperature ultimate tensile strength (σuts) and elongation at fracture (εf); coercivity is shown in units of kiloamperes per metre. the smm types are: iron (fe); amorphous alloys based on cobalt or iron (am co-based and am fe-based, respectively); crystalline alloys containing pairs of the elements iron, cobalt, nickel (ni) and silicon (si); and multicomponent alloys, which contain combinations of three or more elements. (adapted from fig. 4a of ref. 6.)crystalline materials are composed of grains, and the coercivity of crystalline soft magnetic materials decreases with the sixth power of the grain size, for grains smaller than about 0.5 micrometres4. therefore, the usual way to achieve low coercivity is to use nanocrystalline materials that have tiny grain sizes (less than 15 nm) or amorphous materials — which can be thought of as having even smaller ‘grain sizes’ of approximately atomic distances, because they lack the long-range order of crystalline materials and possess only short-range order. however, nanocrystalline and amorphous materials are brittle and difficult to shape because of their poor malleability.han et al. took a contrarian approach. they started from a soft matrix alloy that has a coarse grain size of 85 µm, to ensure that coercivity is influenced by features within the grains, rather than by the grain boundaries. they then formed precipitates to strengthen the alloy. to reduce the problem of precipitates pinning the domain walls, the authors carefully controlled the chemistry and microstructure of their material, and adjusted the size of the precipitates to be smaller than the nanoscale domain-wall thickness. for the same purpose, they also optimized the ratio of surface area to volume for the precipitates, and the strain caused by mismatch of the crystal lattices of the precipitates and the matrix. they were thus able to achieve low coercivity and high toughness, a previously elusive combination. lost magnetism pinned on atomic rotationsan important reason for han and co-workers’ success is that the many constituent elements in multicomponent alloys allow different, often conflicting, properties to be optimized individually — which is difficult, if not impossible, in alloys consisting of just one or two principal elements9. one can therefore envisage that alloys with even better mechanical and soft magnetic properties than those of the currently reported material will be developed, guided by han and colleagues’ approach.for example, applications such as high-speed rotors might require much higher strengths to prevent permanent deformation occurring under high centrifugal forces. applications that operate at elevated temperatures will require materials that have a high curie point (the temperature above which the material becomes paramagnetic). and still other applications will require much stiffer materials, to limit reversible (elastic) deformations of interacting moving parts that are tightly constrained. a drawback of the current alloy is that its saturation magnetization is lower than those of the best available soft magnetic materials, so changes in alloy composition will be needed for applications that require such high magnetizations. finally, 3d printing of soft magnetic materials10,11 offers opportunities for local tailoring of the composition and microstructure of multicomponent alloys, as well as for optimizing the topology of components made from soft magnetic materials.overall, i am optimistic that han and co-workers’ findings will lead to further improvements in the properties of soft magnetic materials. such enhancements could support efforts to miniaturize and improve the efficiency of electrical machines and electronic devices. this, in turn, could help society to achieve its goals for the sustainable development of new technology.