intrinsically stretchable qd-based semiconducting nanocomposites enable the realization of electronic retina with multispectral response.you have full access to this article via your institution.vision is arguably the most important way of perceiving the external world. inspired by the human retina, various electronic imaging devices have been developed including charge-coupled devices (ccd) and complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (cmos) image sensors. however, they are made of rigid and brittle semiconductor materials such as si and gaas. realizing flexible imaging sensors is of great interest, because it can turn any complex, curvy surfaces into electronic eyes, for applications in the internet of things and metaverse1. to achieve stretchable and flexible photosensors, many approaches have been proposed. one example is to bond inorganic semiconductor circuit islands onto the soft substrate, which are further interconnected by suspending serpentine shaped stretchable bridges2,3. another approach is to construct flexible circuits using compliant polymeric matrices that contain organic semiconducting nanomaterials4,5. however, most of the flexible photosensors cannot see colours, and challenges remain to achieve full colour flexible devices.writing in nature nanotechnology, song and colleagues demonstrate a flexible sheet of electronic retina with multispectral response, as sketched in fig. 1 (ref. 6). the authors employ semiconducting quantum dots (qds) as artificial photoreceptor cells. illuminated by photons with energy larger than the bandgap, valence electrons can be excited into the conductance band. the qds are further introduced into a network of conducting polymer fibrils, which act as artificial nerve fibres to evacuate the photoinduced carriers. by embedding the entire qd-fibril network in a polymer elastomeric matrix, a stretchable photosensitive layer is fabricated. this stretchable layer is used as the channel material to manufacture phototransistors. row source/drain electrodes are fabricated on the top and column gate electrodes are at the bottom of the photosensitive layer. the intersecting points of the row and column electrodes define the phototransistor pixels. the fabricated device here shows a good mechanical stability since no significant degradation in the optoelectronic and mechanical performance are observed during 1,000 cyclic stretching tests.light emitted by objects is received by the electronic retina. free carriers are generated within qds at each pixel, and transported out via an artificial nerve network. the red, green and blue qds with different bandgaps enable the perception of different colours.such phototransistor array design is highly tunable and scalable. for example, the spectral response of the array can be effectively varied by using qds of different bandgaps. this is very different from the traditional imaging sensors, which rely on separate colour filters to acquire different spectral responses. furthermore, due to the good transparency of the nanocomposite layer, multiple arrays can be easily piled up to extend functions. in the work presented here, the authors stack three phototransistor arrays using quantum dots with bandgaps matching red, green and blue wavelengths, respectively. by checking the response from different layers, the colour of the incident light is identified.the electronic retina developed here is of high flexibility, and can be conformally laminated onto a curvy surface, making any object an electronic eye. as an example, song et al. first bond their phototransistor array with a polydimethylsiloxane (pdms) microlens array, which is then attached onto a hemispherical surface, forming an electronic compound eye. the compound eyes are ubiquitous in insects that possess unique supremacy of high temporal resolution and nearly infinite depth of field. such electronic compound eyes are very useful in surveillance devices and endoscopes7,8. the authors further show that aided by artificial intelligence, such an electric vision system can calibrate image aberrations during mechanical deformations automatically and reconstruct the image with high precision.the flexible retina here consists of 5×5 pixels. it is expected that its pixel number can be scaled up, through advanced microelectronics foundries, to the tens of millions level, similar to commercial cameras. in addition, this artificial retina can respond across the ultraviolet and infrared range using different qds, showing superior spectral perception than its biological counterparts. furthermore, combined with the cutting edge opto-electronic neural network architecture9, this electronic retina can be used to build lightweight lensless machine vision, which has numerous applications in scenarios of autonomous driving, smart homes, and smart security. notably, the cadmium selenide qds used here are toxic. it may be necessary to replace them with nontoxic ones to implant in the human body for prosthetic eyes and to establish human-machine interfaces. moreover, there are still some technical obstacles in improving the optoelectronic performance of the flexible retinas to be comparable with the inorganic (si, gaas) ones. nevertheless, the design proposed by song et al. represents a significant breakthrough in stretchable optoelectronics.song, j. k., kim, m. s., yoo, s., koo, j. h. & kim, d. h. nano res. 14, 2919–2937 (2021).cas article google scholar song, y. m. et al. nature 497, 95–99 (2013).cas article google scholar kim, m. s. et al. nat .electron. 3, 546–553 (2020).article google scholar matsuhisa, n. et al. nat. mater. 16, 834–840 (2017).cas article google scholar son, d. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 13, 1057–1065 (2018).cas article google scholar song, j.-k. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01160-x (2022).altaqui, a. et al. sci. adv. 7, eabe3196 (2021).dai, b. et al. nat. commun. 12, 6458 (2021).cas article google scholar shi, w. et al. light sci. appl. 11, 121 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesthe key laboratory of weak-light nonlinear photonics, ministry of education, school of physics and teda applied physics institute, nankai university, tianjin, chinamengxin ren & jingjun xuteda applied physics institute, nankai university, tianjin, chinamengxin ren & jingjun xuyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jingjun xu.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsren, m., xu, j. quantum dot nanocomposites for flexible retina. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 819–820 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01190-5download citationpublished: 10 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01190-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 