there are no silver bullet chemistries for batteries — but zinc technology, with its safety, cost and environmental advantages, has received renewed interest as a choice for sustainability. now, direct imaging sheds light on the charge carrier, clearing a major barrier to understanding and upgrading this energy system.you have full access to this article via your institution.zinc batteries are a century-old technology. notably, zinc–manganese dioxide (zn–mno2) cells operating in an aqueous electrolyte of potassium hydroxide (koh) have dominated the primary battery market for nearly seven decades. more recently, it has been shown that adopting a mild acidic electrolyte enables this chemistry fairly good rechargeability. the potential of rechargeable zn–mno2 batteries for large-scale energy storage is therefore huge, as they can leverage not only their unique benefits but also the existing industry infrastructure and supply chains for the alkaline battery. however, the exact mechanism for charge storage remains a fundamental issue under debate. research has so far considered the zinc ion (zn2+) as the main, if not exclusive, charge carrier to be inserted into the mno2 cathode. more recently, the proton (h+), generated from water decomposition, has been recognized as an important co-insertion species1. diverse mechanisms have been proposed to explain how charge carriers can be reversibly included in a simple cathode, including pure zn2+ intercalation, h+ conversion2, step-wise h+ and zn2+ co-insertion3, and deposition dissolution4. the precise determination of h+ inside the mno2 framework holds the key, but unfortunately, h+ is extremely small and x-ray invisible, and therefore very few characterization techniques can help with such determination.reporting in nature sustainability, lu and co-workers describe the fundamental exploration of cations inserted into the mno2 framework from a microscopic perspective5. using an electron probe transmitting through discharged mno2 tunnels, they were able to visualize the atomistic picture of the tunnel-guided charge carrier insertion mechanisms in an aqueous zn–mno2 battery. combining statistical compositional analysis of single mno2 nanoparticles, they showed that h+ insertion instead of zn2+ mainly accounts for the charge storage process (fig. 1). instead of a conversion reaction that transforms mno2 into other phases (for example, mnooh or znmn2o4, as claimed by most previous studies1,2), their observation reveals that h+ insertion mainly follows intercalation-based chemistry within the mno2 tunnel framework, whose structure is hence largely maintained upon discharging to the composition of hmno2.the microscopy observation provides atomic-scale insights and confirms that h+ insertion, instead of zn2+ uptake, dominates the charge-storage process.electron microscopy here behaves like an eye with atomistic accuracy that allows us to discern the structural complexity of electrochemically active materials in batteries upon cycling, demonstrating how electrochemistry puzzles can be decrypted in a visible manner. the proton insertion is accompanied by an anisotropic lattice change of the mno2 unit cell. such experimental observations are well supported by density functional theory calculations and provide the lattice positions for the hydroxyl groups in hxmno2 at different h content (x).this in-depth microscopic study discloses atomic details of how protons intercalate into the host as well as how the host structure responds to the intercalation. in particular, the anisotropic intercalation kinetics and the non-homogeneous charge storage identified in this study could reasonably account for the cycling instability of the electrode, suggesting the importance of tuning proton presence in host electrodes to enhance endurability. although this work focuses on a specific tunnel-structured mno2 host to demonstrate the interesting proton intercalation kinetics, the technique could be generally applicable to most active materials in aqueous electrolytes, as the possibility of proton intercalation universally exists beyond mno2 (refs. 6,7).the advance presented in this work represents another milestone, although not necessarily the terminus, for the development of rechargeable aqueous zinc batteries. as the inserted proton comes from the decomposition of the water, which creates free hydroxyl, the ph value of the electrolyte varies continuously throughout the electrochemical cycling of the battery. the effect of ph, as well as the amount of electrolyte, on the cation storage mechanisms need to be better understood8.without doubt, the insight into the active species provides useful guidelines for constructing more reversible zn–mno2 batteries. considering the low cost of materials and low dependency on the production facility, upon further optimization, the more sustainable zn battery could serve as an alternative and supplement to li-ion batteries and lead-acid batteries, especially in the field of stationary storage and low-energy applications.xu, c., li, b., du, h. & kang, f. angew. chem. int. ed. 51, 933–935 (2012).cas article google scholar pan, h. et al. nat. energy 1, 16039 (2016).cas article google scholar sun, w. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 139, 9775–9778 (2017).cas article google scholar guo, x. et al. mater. today energy 16, 100396 (2020).article google scholar yuan, y. et al. nat. sustain. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00919-3 (2022).article google scholar ma, l. et al. energy environ. sci. 11, 2521–2530 (2018).cas article google scholar kundu, d. et al. nat. energy 1, 16119 (2016).cas article google scholar wang, f. et al. adv. energy mater. 11, 2102016 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry and biochemistry, university of maryland, college park, md, usafei wang & chunsheng wangbattery science branch, energy science division, ccdc us army research laboratory, adelphi, md, usakang xuyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to kang xu or chunsheng wang.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionswang, f., xu, k. & wang, c. charge carrier unveiled. nat sustain (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00928-2download citationpublished: 08 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00928-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 