cnidarians and ctenophores have morphologically simpler nervous systems than those of bilaterians. discovery and characterization of neuropeptides in a comb jelly and a sea anemone support a common origin of animal peptidergic neurons from digestive cells that could sense their environment.you have full access to this article via your institution.animal neural organization is remarkably diverse. while most bilaterians have complex centralised nervous systems, cnidarians and ctenophores have morphologically simple nerve nets. sponges and placozoans, however, have no nervous system. neurons appeared over 600 million years ago, and regardless of all the diversity in neural systems, regulatory peptides are secreted by neurons in all animals and by other cell types in neuron-less groups, including unicellular relatives of animals1,2,3,4, leading to the hypothesis that the first neurons were probably peptidergic — i.e. they used small peptide molecules as their neurotransmitters5. the evolutionary history of the nervous system is debated. for example, some have proposed an independent origin of comb jellies’ nervous system6. however, debate around the phylogenetic placement of comb jellies as the sister group to all other animals6,7 and the lack of clear molecular signatures typical of cnidarian and bilaterian neurons in comb jelly neurons6,8 make it challenging to test this idea. writing in nature ecology & evolution, hayakawa et al.9 characterize neuropeptidergic systems in the comb jelly bolinopsis (ctenophora) and the sea anemone nematostella (cnidaria), and compare their properties with those of bilateria, as well as with digestive cells. the data support a common origin of animal peptidergic neurons and are the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that the first neurons originated from digestive cells that could sense their environment (fig. 1).a, initially, digestive cells with the ability to sense environment (note the sensory receptors on the cell membrane) secreted proteases to cleave extracellular proteins. b, peptidergic sensory cells started to use secreted proteases for cleavage of endogenous secreted proteins. c, eventually these sensory cells evolved into peptidergic neurons.bolinopsis and nematostella are very distant relatives of well-characterized bilaterians; therefore their neuropeptides cannot be identified by sequence similarity search. hayakawa et al.9 use a discovery approach that does not rely on knowledge of previously described neuropeptides. they use mass spectrometry to identify neuropeptide structures and apply immunofluorescence microscopy to identify neuropeptide-producing cells, whose function they then characterize in vivo.neuropeptide biosynthesis is a multistep process: mature peptides come from long precursor proteins cleaved into shorter fragments that often get further modifications such as c-terminal amidation and n-terminal pyroglutamation. these short mature peptides regulate development, behaviour and many physiological processes such as muscle contraction. hayakawa et al.9 identified multiple short amidated peptides in bolinopsis and nematostella. interestingly, neuropeptide precursors detected in bolinopsis shared no sequence similarity with cnidarian and bilaterian precursors. unlike in bilaterians, where acidic cleavage sites are rare (yet detectable) and instead basic sites are mostly used, precursor cleavage at acidic residues turned out to be very common in the non-bilaterian bolinopsis and nematostella. structural characteristics shared between cnidarian, bilaterian and ctenophore neuropeptides, such as modifications of n- and c- termini, and use of acidic cleavage sites indicate deep evolutionary roots of the peptidergic system. however, neuropeptides known from bilaterians4, and predicted earlier in the comb jelly mnemiopsis2, are not always amidated, thereby suggesting that more neuropeptide structures are still to be discovered.in bolinopsis, peptides are produced by neurons with long neurites as well as by neurite-less cells in the main sensory organ (known as the apical organ), tentacles and pharynx. the neuropeptide localization in bolinopsis is largely similar to neuropetpide expression in its close relative, the lobate comb jelly mnemiopsis that was reported earlier2. however, the distribution of peptidergic neurons is only partially conserved between pelagic bolinopsis and a benthic ctenophore vallicula with drastically different anatomy, indicating that neuropeptides might be important for adaptations to different environments9. however, in all studied comb jellies2,9, neuropeptides are packaged into vesicles that are broadly distributed in the neurites and cell body, and are not limited to synapses. this suggests that peptidergic signalling is probably mediated by neuropeptide diffusion through tissues and not by synaptic wiring typical of bilaterian nervous systems.conducting experiments with comb jellies is challenging because they are not established lab models and therefore many techniques have to be developed. to study neuropeptide effects in vivo, hayakawa et al. designed a new set up to incubate comb jellies with newly discovered neuropeptides, recorded videos and measured changes in body shape. the authors found that two peptides triggered muscle contraction in bolinopsis, which is in line with neuropeptide function in cnidarians and placozoans (the latter have no muscles but still change their body shape in response to endogenous peptides). such a reaction is probably underlain by binding of neuropeptides to their receptors. hayakawa et al. used a machine learning-based algorithm to pair 11 peptides with 38 g-protein-coupled receptors. these putative neuropeptide receptors are localized in multiple cell types, providing further evidence that neuronal transmission occurs mainly through chemical wiring rather than synaptic connectivity.the comb jellies bolinopsis and mnemiopsis share multiple neuropeptide precursors2,9. analysing transcriptomes of comb jelly8 and sea anemone10 peptidergic cell types, hayakawa et al. found conserved genes possibly involved in neuropeptide synthesis and degradation, in regulated secretion, and in neural development. along with other cell types, some peptidergic cells express one of the glutamate transporter homologues (slc 17), suggesting that they may act both through peptide and glutamate signals. this is consistent with comb jelly neurons having both electron-dense and translucent vesicles, which are probably filled with neuropeptides or small molecule transmitters, respectively2. the authors also observed that genes probably involved in neuropeptide biosynthesis and vesicular transport and release are expressed not only in the peptidergic cells, but also in digestive and epithelial cells. in particular, secreted proteases are involved in both neuropeptide processing and digestion. this finding led them to hypothesize that neurons and digestive cells are evolutionarily related, such that neurons are derived from digestive cells with a sensory ability who started to use proteolytic products of endogenous proteins as regulatory peptides (fig. 1). microvilli and cilia detected on digestive cells of comb jellies11 suggest that they may actually be able to sense environmental cues.this ‘digestive neuron’ hypothesis by hayakawa et al. is one of several recently proposed hypotheses of neuronal origin. unlike others that suggest that neurons originated many times from different types of secretory cells12 or point out only one out of many ctenophore neuron types as homologous to the bilaterian neurons13, the digestive neuron hypothesis claims a single origin for all peptidergic cells, followed by co-option of small molecule transmitters like glutamate from other cells. interestingly, expression of neuronal gene sets was also detected in cell types involved in feeding in sponges14.while hayakawa et al. focus on peptidergic cell types, electron microscopy data indicate that ctenophores have non-peptidergic sensory cells (also known as onion-root cells11), even if they have not been identified at the molecular level yet. additionally, characterized peptidergic neurons belong to the subepithelial nerve net, but comb jellies also have mesogleal neurons lying deeper in the body15, and their effector molecules remain unknown as well. a more complete picture of the origin and evolution of the nervous system requires comparative analyses of the molecular machinery of these cell types too.yañez-guerra, l. a., thiel, d. & jékely, g. mol. biol. evol. 39, msac051 (2022).article google scholar sachkova, m. y. et al. curr. biol. 31, 5274–5285.e6 (2021).cas article google scholar grimmelikhuijzen, c. j., leviev, i. & carstensen, k. int. rev. cytol. 167, 37–89 (1996).cas article google scholar jékely, g. et al. j. exp. biol. 221, jeb166710 (2018).article google scholar jékely, g. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 376, 20190761 (2021).article google scholar moroz, l. l. et al. nature 510, 109–114 (2014).cas article google scholar jékely, g., paps, j. & nielsen, c. evodevo 6, 1 (2015).article google scholar sebé-pedrós, a. et al. nat. ecol. evol. 2, 1176–1188 (2018).article google scholar hayakawa, e. et al. nat. ecol. evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01835-7 (2022).sebé-pedrós, a. et al. cell 173, 1520–1534.e20 (2018).article google scholar hernandez-nicaise, m.-l. in microscopic anatomy of invertebrates vol. 2 (ed harrison, f. w.) ctenophora (wiley-liss, 1991).moroz, l. l. front. cell dev. biol. 9, 669087 (2021).article google scholar burkhardt, p. & jékely, g. curr. opin. neurobiol. 71, 127–138 (2021).cas article google scholar musser, j. m. et al. science 374, 717–723 (2021).cas article google scholar jager, m. et al. j. exp. zool. b mol. dev. evol. 316b, 171–187 (2011).article google scholar download referencessars international centre for marine molecular biology, university of bergen, bergen, norwaymaria y. sachkovayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to maria y. sachkova.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionssachkova, m.y. neuropeptides at the origin of neurons. nat ecol evol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01828-6download citationpublished: 08 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01828-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 