lee and colleagues reveal a previously unrecognized population of astrocytes in the aged brain with disrupted proteostatic signaling that generates defects in astrocyte morphology, protein trafficking and synapse maintenance in the aging hippocampus.you have full access to this article via your institution.in many individuals, the brain exhibits a progressive decline in cognitive abilities with advancing age. reductions in processing speed can lead to slowed decision-making, while conceptual reasoning and memory retention become increasingly difficult. such impairments in cognition have been linked to age-related reductions in synapse size and plasticity, which can occur even without neuronal loss1. these observations indicate that neuronal death may not be the primary cause of reduced circuit function in the aging brain2. in recent years, astrocytes, the primary perisynaptic glial cell type of the brain, have emerged as pivotal regulators of neuronal synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity. astrocytes control these processes via the secretion of synaptogenic factors and establishment of functional cell adhesions with synapses3,4. in this issue of nature aging, a new study by lee et al. reports striking observations of region-specific disruptions in astrocyte gene expression and homeostatic function in the aging hippocampus. the study concludes that these disruptions may underlie neuronal circuit breakdown in both aged brains and neurodegenerative disorders5 (fig. 1).lee et al5. show that this subpopulation of astrocytes, which they named autophagy-disrupted astrocytes (apdas), exhibit severe defects in proteostasis, including autophagosome accumulation, disrupted protein trafficking and reduced lysosomal function. these deficits give rise to a reduced capacity to interact with synapses chemically and structurally and lead to a breakdown of astrocyte-mediated synapse regulation. figure created with biorender (biorender.com).in their study, lee et al. used single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq) in 2-year-old mouse hippocampi to identify age-related alterations in astrocyte function. this endeavor revealed three distinct clusters of astrocytic cell populations, described as clusters 2, 3 and 6. the authors found that cluster 6 represents a novel population of astrocytes present exclusively in the aged hippocampus that exhibits upregulated expression of genes related to astrocyte homeostasis, synaptogenesis and synapse elimination. the existence of this population raised the question of whether these cells represent a functionally distinct population of aged astrocytes and, if so, whether they contribute to the circuit defects that underlie cognitive decline in the aging brain.the authors performed immunohistochemistry in aged mouse hippocampi to elucidate the unique functional characteristics of cluster 6 astrocytes. they used upregulated genes in cluster 6 as markers to study the localization and morphology of this unique astrocyte population. morphologically, cluster 6 astrocytes possess swollen processes compared to neighboring astrocytes. typically, astrocytes are highly ramified cells and form many finely branched processes that structurally interact with synapses to control synapse maintenance and plasticity4,6. consequently, disruptions in astrocyte morphology can generate severe defects in synapse health and circuit function. surprisingly, the authors discovered that the morphological defects of cluster 6 astrocytes resulted from increased vacuole accumulation. these vacuoles contained several proteins with upregulated expression in cluster 6 astrocytes, including scrg1, cldn10 and gstm1, suggesting that age-dependent protein trafficking deficits give rise to the observed transcriptional disparities of cluster 6 astrocytes.astrocyte-mediated synaptogenesis is dependent on the precise localization of adhesion proteins, receptors and astrocyte-secreted synaptogenic factors. therefore, disruptions in astrocytic protein trafficking can give rise to significant defects in synapse maintenance and function. such disturbances in protein trafficking could also explain the accumulation of vacuoles and the formation of engorged astrocytic processes in cluster 6 cells. to probe for protein trafficking defects in cluster 6 astrocytes, the authors examined the expression patterns of the endolysosomal proteins rab5 and lamp2 in normal and cluster 6 astrocytes. the overall expression of rab5 and lamp2 was not altered in cluster 6 astrocytes; however, both proteins accumulated within the vacuoles of swollen processes. when the authors then assessed the localization of astrocytic membrane proteins in cluster 6 cells, they found that megf10, a phagocytic receptor involved in synapse elimination, and ldlr, a receptor for apoe, were mislocalized to and accumulated in vacuoles. these findings suggest that protein trafficking is significantly disrupted in cluster 6 astrocytes. what are the origins of the vacuoles in which these proteins accumulate? the authors found that the cluster 6 vacuoles contained the autophagosome markers lc3b and p62, thus identifying them as autophagosomes. subsequent analysis of cell health revealed that cluster 6 astrocytes were neither apoptotic nor necrotic and possessed fully intact membranes, suggesting that their trafficking defects do not necessarily affect overall cell health. given that in aging brains, synapse loss and cognitive decline are not typically accompanied by cell death, these findings may reveal a novel mechanism of signaling deficits in the aging brain. additionally, the intersection of morphological and protein trafficking defects stemming from the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in cluster 6 astrocytes presents an exciting avenue for future research into autophagy in the aging brain. these observations prompted the authors to name the cluster 6 cells autophagy-disrupted astrocytes, or apdas.why do apdas accumulate autophagosomes at significantly higher volumes than normal astrocytes? the mtor cellular growth pathway is a crucial regulator of autophagy and autophagosome formation, making it a likely suspect7. lee and colleagues report that inhibiting mtor signaling by injecting the mtor inhibitor rapamycin into 9-month-old mice was sufficient to induce the formation of apdas, identified by the presence of markers of naturally occurring apdas. furthermore, the potent regulatory crosstalk between the ubiquitin–proteasome system (ups), a protein degradation pathway, and autophagy led the authors to hypothesize that ups may contribute to apda formation8. similar to rapamycin, injection of 9-month-old mice with the proteasome inhibitor mg132 induced the formation of apdas. strikingly, in both the rapamycin- and mg132-injected mice, the authors observed apdas only in the hippocampi of old animals, and injections of either compound in 4-month-old mice failed to produce vacuolated astrocytes. these findings indicate that astrocytes in the aging hippocampus are uniquely vulnerable to perturbations in mtor and proteasome signaling, thus increasing their susceptibility to dysregulated cellular proteostasis and potentially decreasing their capacity to regulate synapse formation and maintenance. this vulnerability may stem from a reduction in protein folding quality control or increased cellular stress, both of which have been shown to influence mtor signaling9. future studies employing proteostatic biosensors, metabolic stress, or oxidative stress readouts may provide valuable insight into the mechanisms underlying apda formation in the aging brain.the authors also report a reduction in mtor and proteasome activity in astrocytes from the hippocampi of 18-month-old mice compared to those of 4-month-old mice. in the case of mtor signaling, basal activity was further reduced in the naturally occurring apdas of these mice, providing further evidence supporting the involvement of mtor in apda formation. given these observations, can mtor activation possibly ameliorate the formation of apdas in the aging hippocampus? treating 18-month-old mice with the mtor activator 3bdo significantly reduced the appearance of apdas compared to that in controls, indicating that upregulation of mtor can convert apdas back to healthy astrocytes in the aged brain. although this finding provides an exciting avenue for future therapeutic research, it also challenges existing studies supporting the use of the mtor inhibitor rapamycin as an anti-aging therapy, as lee et al. demonstrate that reduced mtor signaling may be a significant contributor to apda formation10. future research will be needed to better understand the regulatory alterations in mtor signaling across cell types in the aging brain and to provide additional context to the relationships between aging, mtor and apda formation.lee and colleagues hypothesized that apdas might exhibit impaired synaptogenic functions, thereby contributing significantly to the dysregulation of synapse health observed in the aging brain. astrocytes regulate synapse number via the secretion of synapse-modulating factors, such as thrombospondins, hevin, and sparc11. compared to healthy astrocytes, apdas had significantly reduced secretion of hevin and sparc, indicating that protein secretion is disrupted in apdas and that this disruption directly affects synaptogenic signaling by these astrocytes. upon probing for abnormalities in synaptic engulfment by apdas using a fluorescent synapse phagocytosis reporter, the authors found that apdas had a significantly lower capacity to engulf and digest synapses than neighboring astrocytes. electron microscopy imaging further revealed that apdas retract their fine processes from synapses. these findings are of particular significance because they demonstrate that the proteostatic dysfunction of apdas extends beyond protein secretion and results in a greatly diminished capacity to regulate synapse number in the aged hippocampus. in line with these findings, the number of excitatory synapses labeled with vglut1 and psd95 was significantly lower in regions surrounding apdas compared to normal astrocytes in the hippocampi of 18-month-old mice. interestingly, rapamycin-induced apdas did not generate a similar decrease in excitatory synapses after 10 days, suggesting that transient mtor inhibition alone is insufficient to create functional deficits in the synaptogenic properties of hippocampal astrocytes. nevertheless, this exciting study reveals a functionally and morphologically distinct population of astrocytes in the aged hippocampus that may underlie the synaptic reduction and cognitive decline observed in the aging brain.finally, as aging is a risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer’s, the authors sought to determine whether apdas form at differential rates in ad brains compared to healthy brains. in the app/ps1 ad mouse model12, apdas were present in hippocampi by 6 months, much earlier than in wild-type animals. scrna-seq in hippocampi from these app/ps1 mice revealed a cell cluster with upregulation of apda markers similar to that observed in the original cluster 6 astrocytes from the aged mouse brains. future studies are needed to determine whether apdas contribute to synaptic dysfunction in ad or are a symptomatic result of underlying ad mechanisms. similarly, investigation of apda-like astrocytes in other neurodegenerative diseases and in older adults with non-hippocampal pathology may be fruitful.in summary, lee et al. expand upon the mounting evidence supporting critical roles for astrocytes in neuronal development and function and indicate that such roles may become compromised with advancing age. their discovery of age-related proteostatic vulnerability and dysregulation in hippocampal astrocytes highlights the need for additional studies investigating the significance of astrocytes in age-related pathologies.morrison, j. h. & baxter, m. g. nat. rev. neurosci. 13, 240–250 (2012).cas article google scholar rapp, p. r. & gallagher, m. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 93, 9926–9930 (1996).cas article google scholar christopherson, k. s. et al. cell 120, 421–433 (2005).cas article google scholar chung, w.-s., allen, n. j. & eroglu, c. cold spring harb. perspect. biol. 7, a020370 (2015).article google scholar lee, e. et al. nat. aging https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00257-1 (2022).bernardinelli, y. et al. curr. biol. 24, 1679–1688 (2014).cas article google scholar jung, c. h., ro, s.-h., cao, j., otto, n. m. & kim, d.-h. febs lett. 584, 1287–1295 (2010).cas article google scholar kocaturk, n. m. & gozuacik, d. front. cell dev. biol. 6, 128 (2018).article google scholar su, k.-h. & dai, c. bioessays 39, 1600268 (2017).article google scholar wilkinson, j. e. et al. aging cell 11, 675–682 (2012).cas pubmed google scholar baldwin, k. t. & eroglu, c. curr. opin. neurobiol. 45, 113–120 (2017).cas article google scholar jankowsky, j. l. et al. hum. mol. genet. 13, 159–170 (2004).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of cell biology, duke university medical center, durham, nc, usaryan baumert, nicholas brose & cagla erogludepartment of neurobiology, duke university medical center, durham, nc, usacagla erogluduke institute for brain sciences (dibs), durham, nc, usacagla erogluhoward hughes medical institute, duke university, durham, nc, usacagla erogluyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to cagla eroglu.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbaumert, r., brose, n. & eroglu, c. astrocytic traffic jams in the aging brain. nat aging 2, 681–683 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00270-4download citationpublished: 01 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00270-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 