incorporating genetic factors into risk models improves the prediction of severe obesity for survivors of childhood cancer, which could promote early interventions and better long-term care.you have full access to this article via your institution.approximately 85% of children diagnosed with cancer will be cured of their primary cancer, but epidemiologic and clinical studies have characterized a significant burden of morbidity, as well as excess early mortality, in survivors1. this burden has largely been attributed to toxic treatment exposures during childhood cancer treatment. excess cardiovascular-related disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in survivors of childhood cancer, which is associated with exposure to cardiotoxic therapy, such as anthracyclines and therapeutic radiation to the chest2. traditional cardiometabolic risk factors, including obesity, also contribute to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease in survivors as they age, and survivors of childhood cancers have been found to have high rates of obesity3,4,5.in this issue of nature medicine, sapkota and colleagues6 estimate the prevalence of, and risk factors for, morbid obesity in survivors of childhood cancer and examine the potential contributions of genetic risk. utilizing the two largest cohorts of survivors of childhood cancer in north america — the st. jude lifetime cohort and the childhood cancer survivor study — sapkota and colleagues developed and validated a new prediction model for high risk of morbid obesity in survivors, incorporating genetic risk scores derived from the general population7,8. as a key finding, the authors demonstrate that the addition of genetic risk factors significantly improved the prediction of morbid obesity in adult survivors of childhood cancer; more survivors with high predicted odds of morbid obesity were identified with the inclusion of genetic risk factors than with modeling based on clinical, treatment and lifestyle factors alone. the extent of the contribution of genetic factors to the development of morbid obesity in survivors of childhood cancer had not previously been established.from a clinical perspective, conceptualizing risk among survivors of childhood cancer involves considering cancer treatment–related factors and individual factors that influence risk (fig. 1). whereas aspects of risk related to treatment already delivered cannot be modified, long-term care of the survivor includes implementation of judicious surveillance and attention to those risk factors that are modifiable3,9. for example, risk for cardiac disease in survivors who received high doses of cardiotoxic anthracyclines as anti-cancer therapy is managed with both careful follow-up using functional imaging to detect pre-symptomatic ventricular dysfunction and close attention to other acknowledged general-population cardiac risk factors, including hypertension and hyperlipidemia2,9. there is a growing recognition that population-level genetic risk factors for some conditions may also apply to risk prediction for survivors of childhood cancer, and the current study contributes to this framework.survivors of childhood cancer are at increased risk for morbidity in adulthood. an emerging approach to care could include incorporating genetic risk into comprehensive risk prediction.as a striking example, sapkota and colleagues note that, as compared with survivors in the bottom decile of genetic obesity risk (as assessed by a genome-wide polygenic score, grscommon), those in the highest decile were 53-times more likely to develop morbid obesity — which is about twice as high as the corresponding 25-fold risk gradient of morbid obesity in the general population5,7. that genetic susceptibility may have even greater influence among survivors of childhood cancer is particularly intriguing, raising questions about the biologic underpinnings of chronic disease risk (in this case obesity) among survivors of cancer, and the interaction of treatment exposure–based risk and genetic risk. it also raises the question of whether future strategies could involve altering treatment exposures to decrease risk among the most susceptible individuals.treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia — the most common childhood cancer — is associated with excessive weight gain during therapy, and some children go on to be overweight or obese for the rest of their lives5. what would it mean to the clinician, the patient or the family to have the genetic risk profile in hand at the time of cancer diagnosis or early in the course of survivorship? could this allow for meaningful preemptive intervention? importantly, sapkota and colleagues found that only a small percentage of those with morbid obesity in adulthood were morbidly obese at the time of their childhood cancer diagnosis. what remains to be determined is how best to intervene to change the trajectory of obesity in the setting of childhood cancer and high genetic obesity risk. would nutritional, activity-based, pharmacologic or combined interventions early in survivorship, or even during treatment, be optimal? in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia, previous research suggests that children are at risk of excessive weight gain early in the multiple-year treatment course, pointing to the potential value of preemptive intervention5. the degree to which early comprehensive risk profiling, enhanced by genetic risk estimation, could inform new personalized, successful and practical interventions remains to be explored.risk prediction models that include patient characteristics and treatment exposures have already been developed for other chronic conditions faced by survivors of childhood cancer, including stroke, congestive heart failure and early ovarian failure10,11,12. here the work of sapkota and colleagues leverages the current understanding of genetic risk for obesity in the general population and suggests that the development of predictive models that incorporate genetic risk has the potential to optimize clinically relevant obesity risk prediction for survivors of childhood cancer. such a prospect holds substantial appeal in the clinical setting because it could allow for more personalized survivorship care.further work would be needed to realize the promise of genetic risk prediction in the clinical setting. the authors suggest that advances in computational abilities and the decreasing cost of genetic testing could make the acquisition and interpretation of genotypic data for risk prediction modeling feasible for survivors in the future. beyond tackling the financial cost and computational challenges, clinical application would also require the education of clinicians to understand and communicate predictive ability and limitations, the development of tools to communicate risk, and the integration of the perspectives of survivors of childhood cancer. in addition, as noted by sapkota and colleagues, models developed in survivors of european ancestry had low predictive ability for survivors of african ancestry, highlighting the crucial importance of representation of diverse groups to promote equitable access to clinical advances in the application of genetic risk prediction.the study by sapkota and colleagues directs us to important areas for future research. a better understanding of genetic risk has the potential to inform treatment decisions and enhance the long-term care of survivors of childhood cancer. there is much to be done: systems to integrate genetic risk assessment will need to be developed, and targeted and effective interventions to mitigate risks will need to be explored. nonetheless, the study by sapkota and colleagues shows how risk prediction for survivors of childhood cancer is becoming more refined — which will, we hope, translate into better long-term outcomes for survivors in the near future.miller, k. d. et al. cancer j. clin. https://doi.org/10.3322/caac.21731 (2022).lipshultz, s. e. et al. circulation 128, 1927–1995 (2013).article google scholar armstrong, g. t. et al. j. clin. oncol. 31, 3673–3680 (2013).article google scholar wilson, c. l. et al. cancer 121, 2262–2270 (2015).cas article google scholar browne, e. k. et al. cancer 124, 4248–4259 (2018).cas article google scholar sapkota, y. nat. med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01902-3 (2022).article pubmed google scholar turcot, v. et al. nat. genet. 50, 26–41 (2018). erratum 51, 1191–1192 (2019).cas article google scholar khera, a. v. et al. cell 177, 587–596.e9 (2019).cas article google scholar children’s oncology group. long-term follow-up guidelines for survivors of childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancers v5.0 (2018).chow, e. j. et al. j. clin. oncol. 36, 44–52 (2018).cas article google scholar chow, e. j. et al. j. clin. oncol. 33, 394–402 (2015).article google scholar clark, r. a. et al. lancet oncol. 21, 436–45 (2020).article google scholar download referencesdana-farber cancer institute, boston, ma, usalynda m. vrooman & lisa r. dillerboston children’s hospital, boston, ma, usalynda m. vrooman & lisa r. dilleryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lynda m. vrooman.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsvrooman, l.m., diller, l.r. predicting chronic morbidity in childhood cancer survivors. nat med 28, 1539–1540 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01943-8download citationpublished: 08 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01943-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 