every time you buy something online, sensitive information such as your credit-card number is sent to a merchant. to prevent this information from being obtained by a hacker, it is necessary to ‘lock’ it before sending it. then, if the merchant has a ‘key’ corresponding to the one that was used to lock your information, they can unlock it. but how can these keys be distributed in a secure way, so that only you and the merchant have them? in two papers in nature, nadlinger et al.1 and zhang et al.2 report on a method for using a special property of quantum particles — known as quantum entanglement — to share a secret key without needing to trust the ‘courier’ that performs the exchange. read the paper: experimental quantum key distribution certified by bell's theoremin any cryptographic system, each component that needs to be trusted is a possible doorway through which a hacker can enter. and, just as a room with 100 doors is more difficult to guard than a room with only one door, the number of components that need to be trusted determines how challenging it is to protect a cryptographic system from intrusions. reducing the amount of trust required in such a system is therefore one of the main goals of cryptography.the oldest method of sharing keys is through a courier, but this requires some assurance that the courier has not been bribed or compromised, and that the keys they carry have not been intercepted in transit. using couriers for processes such as online credit-card transactions is not practical: imagine hiring someone to carry a secret key to an online store every time you wanted to buy something. instead, mathematical problems that are difficult to solve — such as calculating the factors of very large numbers — can be used to encrypt information in such a way that only the intended recipient can easily decrypt it. it would be too difficult, and would take too long, for a hacker to perform the decryption calculation using modern computers. read the paper: a device-independent quantum key distribution system for distant usershowever, hackers can still intercept encrypted messages — and then wait, either until more-powerful computers are available, or until weaknesses in the encryption schemes are discovered, allowing the information to be decrypted3. of particular concern is the expected arrival of quantum computers that will be able to solve these difficult mathematical problems in a fraction of the time it takes conventional computers to do so. such computers would compromise the functions that form the basis of current cryptographic schemes.but quantum mechanics can solve this conundrum, by offering an alternative way of distributing keys — using quantum particles, such as photons, as couriers. two people who wish to create a secret key prepare, send and measure photons. the information encoded in the photon cannot be perfectly copied — any measurement of the system will disturb it. a hacker who is trying to intercept the information encoded in a photon will have to measure it in some way, and will therefore introduce anomalies into the system that the sender and receiver can detect. once the key is created, the sender and receiver can use it to encrypt and share secret information4 (fig. 1a).figure 1 | schemes for distributing secret keys using quantum mechanics. quantum particles can be used to deliver a key for encrypting sensitive information, because quantum mechanics dictates that anyone who intercepts the particles will inadvertently disturb them in a way that can be detected. a, in conventional schemes, two parties (labelled alice and bob) can create a key to encrypt and decrypt secret messages, but this method assumes that the particle source and measurement devices have not been compromised. b, nadlinger et al.1 and zhang et al.2 used quantum entanglement — through which pairs of quantum particles are correlated over long distances — to implement a scheme that does not require a trustworthy source or measurement devices. alice and bob can perform a test on their entangled particles under a strict set of conditions to detect whether the source has been compromised, so they need only safeguard their measurement results by sealing their laboratories.because this quantum encryption process does not depend on mathematical functions, a hacker intercepting messages will not be able to decrypt them in the future when improved technology becomes available. for this reason, quantum-key distribution technology is advancing rapidly, with commercial systems already in use. however, the photons cannot be used to detect all possible types of tampering. this method still requires that the photon sources and detectors be trusted, and it is possible for a hacker to exploit this trust to tamper with the system and discover the key5. it would be like hiring a trustworthy courier to carry a secret key in a briefcase locked to their wrist, only to discover that the briefcase itself is bugged.luckily, quantum systems have yet another property that can help to overcome the problems associated with trusting devices. and that’s the phenomenon known as quantum entanglement. entangled particles share strong correlations that have no classical analogue — one interpretation is that measurements or actions on one particle can seem to influence the other particle, even over long distances. these correlations, which albert einstein termed spooky actions at a distance, have an element of randomness that prevents information from being transmitted instantaneously. but in cryptography, this randomness can be used to create a shared secret key that isn’t vulnerable to untrustworthy devices6. a step closer to secure global communicationnadlinger and colleagues and zhang and colleagues used quantum entanglement to implement a next-generation quantum-key distribution method that does not require any trust in the devices used to create and detect the quantum particles. in the authors’ experiments, two parties (called alice and bob, following a convention often used in cryptography) use pairs of entangled particles instead of single photons to exchange the key (fig. 1b). alice and bob measure their particles independently under a strict set of experimental conditions. some of the measurements are used to create a key, whereas others are used to perform a test that has been shown to rigorously detect entanglement7–11. passing the test guarantees that a hacker has not tampered with the entangled particles in any way that would allow them to predict or control alice’s and bob’s measurements. in our courier example, the hacker could provide the briefcase used to transport the keys, and any tampering would still be detected.this method eliminates one of the biggest security risks from the system. because there is no need to trust the devices that create and distribute the entangled particles, these schemes are said to be device independent. alice and bob need worry only about protecting the devices that choose their measurements from being tampered with, and isolating their labs to keep information about their results or the key from leaking out.nadlinger and co-workers performed measurements on entangled ions that were trapped by an oscillating electromagnetic field. their measurements were taken over a period of nearly 8 hours, creating a shared key that was 95,884 bits long. this is the first complete implementation of a device-independent protocol for generating a key. but in this case, the stations were separated by only 2 metres — about the minimum distance needed for alice and bob to carry out a secure conversation while practising social distancing during a pandemic. moving the stations farther apart, to more realistic distances, is not trivial. relativity could ensure security for cash machinesin zhang and colleagues’ experiment, measurements were made on entangled atoms, trapped by laser beams, and the two systems were much farther apart, at a separation of 400 m. the researchers were able to prove that the system met the rigorous requirements for device-independent key distribution. but the rate at which entanglement was generated was so low that a key could not be created in a reasonable amount of time.in both experiments, the rate at which particles at the two stations can be entangled decreases markedly as the distance between them increases. for device-independent quantum-key distribution to become practical, the obstacle of low rates at long distances must be overcome. still, both demonstrations represent major advances in quantum-communications technology.several efforts are under way around the world to build the kinds of entangled quantum network that will eventually support these device-independent cryptographic protocols12. because the requirements for these protocols are so demanding, they serve as a useful benchmark — any quantum network that can meet them is able to exceed a crucial operational threshold. consequently, i expect that our most advanced future quantum networks will have these device-independent cryptographic capabilities built in, enabling widespread adoption of innovative ways of keeping our most sensitive secrets safe.