nadph levels serve as a biomarker of sensitivity to ferroptosis, but the regulators that detect cellular nadph levels and modulate downstream ferroptosis responses are unknown. a study now identifies marchf6 in the ubiquitin system as an nadph sensor that suppresses ferroptosis.you have full access to this article via your institution.ferroptosis is a type of regulated cell death driven by the lethal accumulation of lipid peroxides in cellular membranes. excessive ferroptosis has been causally linked to neurodegenerative and other diseases, whereas impaired ferroptosis contributes to cancer development and metastasis1,2. to maintain cell survival and homeostasis, cells are equipped with ferroptosis defence systems that use cellular antioxidants to neutralize harmful lipid peroxides. reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (nadph), a universal electron donor in all organisms, provides the crucial reducing power to regenerate cellular antioxidants involved in ferroptosis defence, such as cysteine, glutathione, vitamin e, and coenzyme q10 (ref. 3). correspondingly, higher levels of nadph have been shown to correlate with more resistance to ferroptosis in cancer cells4. however, how cells detect and coordinate cellular nadph levels with ferroptosis remains poorly understood.at the end of the ubiquitination cascade, e3 ubiquitin ligases promote protein ubiquitination and degradation by transferring ubiquitin from e2 enzymes to their substrate proteins. marchf6 is an endoplasmic reticulum membrane-embedded multi-transmembrane protein with n- and c-terminal tails facing the cytosol (fig. 1a) and belongs to the membrane-associated ring-ch-type finger family of e3 ubiquitin ligases. its dysregulation has been genetically linked to diverse human diseases, such as epilepsy and cancer5. in this issue of nature cell biology, nguyen et al. report the discovery that marchf6 is an nadph sensor that links the ubiquitin system to ferroptosis suppression6.a, structure of marchf6 in the endoplasmic reticulum (er) membrane. mara, marchf6 activation region; mari, marchf6 inhibitory region; tm, transmembrane region. b, in nadphlow cells, the mari motif inhibits the intramolecular mara–ring interaction, thereby reducing the ubiquitin ligase activity of marchf6, increasing the protein levels of its substrates such as acsl4 and p53, and promoting ferroptosis. fins, ferroptosis inducers. c, in nadphhigh cells, nadph binding to the mara motif displaces mari from binding to mara and enhances the e2-bound mara–ring interaction. this leads to marchf6 activation and subsequent rapid ubiquitination and degradation of its substrates p53 and acsl4, resulting in ferroptosis suppression.some marchf6 substrates are known to be involved in regulating cholesterol homeostasis and lipid metabolism7, suggesting a potential link between marchf6 and lipid peroxidation. nguyen et al. found that ablation of marchf6 increased ferroptosis inducer (fin)-triggered lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis, and this phenotype could be rescued by wild-type marchf6 but not by its enzymatically inactive mutant, confirming that marchf6 suppresses ferroptosis through its ubiquitin ligase activity6. interestingly, fin treatment increased the protein levels of several marchf6 substrates without affecting their mrna levels, which suggests that ferroptotic stress is also involved in marchf6-mediated ubiquitination and protein degradation.to gain additional mechanistic insights into the regulation of ferroptosis by marchf6, nguyen et al. analysed differentially expressed genes from rna-sequencing analyses of wild-type and marchf6 knockout hela cells6. notably, some of the most significantly downregulated genes upon marchf6 deletion were involved in nadp(h) production, which indicates a potential link between marchf6 and nadp(h) metabolism. further analyses indicated that increasing cellular nadp(h) levels (by nad kinase overexpression) promoted the ubiquitin ligase activity of marchf6 and enhanced ferroptosis resistance in a marchf6-dependent manner. these observations suggested that nadph abundance regulates ferroptosis sensitivity by modulating marchf6 activity, and further highlighted a potential communication between nadph and marchf6. additional investigations indicated that fin treatment modulates marchf6 activity possibly through depleting nadph (fig. 1b).elegant functional analyses and computational modelling by the authors identified three regions in marchf6 that are critical for its communication with nadph and ferroptosis: the n-terminal ring domain, the c-terminal marchf6 inhibitory (mari) region (residues 901–910), and the marchf6 activation (mara) region located adjacent to the mari region (residues 870–892) (fig. 1a). the mara region seemed to act as a hub for marchf6, as this region could bind directly to nadph, the ring domain, and the mari region, as well as to e2 enzymes. when cellular nadph levels were low, such as under fin treatment, nguyen et al. observed that the intramolecular interaction between mari and mara prevented mara from binding to the ring domain, weakening the interaction between mara-bound e2 and the ring domain in marchf6 as well as marchf6-mediated ubiquitination6. consequently, marchf6 substrates with pro-ferroptosis functions (such as acsl4 and p53) accumulated, resulting in sensitization to ferroptosis (fig. 1b). by contrast, when cellular nadph levels rose, nadph could bind directly to the mara region, displacing mari from binding to mara, yet promoting mara binding to the ring domain in marchf6, which led to an increased interaction of mara-bound e2 enzymes with the ring domain and enhanced marchf6-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of pro-ferroptosis substrate proteins, and suppression of ferroptosis (fig. 1c). these analyses suggested that marchf6 can sense cellular nadph levels directly, and the switch between different intramolecular interactions in marchf6 allows marchf6 to coordinate cellular nadph levels with its e3 ubiquitin ligase activity and ferroptosis regulation.moving beyond their cell culture studies, the authors studied two in vivo contexts that might be relevant to the function of marchf6 in regulating ferroptosis. first, they showed that marchf6 promoted tumour growth at least partly by suppressing ferroptosis. marchf6 deficiency led to reduced tumour growth with increased ferroptosis marker staining; importantly, ferroptosis inhibitor treatment could restore the growth of marchf6-deficient tumours to sizes similar to those of wild-type tumours. in addition, knocking out marchf6 in mice led to perinatal death as well as severe hepatic injury and growth retardation or postnatal lethality in surviving mice. the authors found that dietary supplementation with vitamin e (a lipophilic antioxidant) could significantly improve the live-birth rate and ameliorate hepatic injury in marchf6 knockout mice, suggesting that marchf6-mediated ferroptosis suppression is crucial for animal development.how cells sense and respond to fluctuations in intracellular nutrient and metabolite levels remains a central question in cell biology. understanding this question can offer important insights into disease treatment. for example, studies of amp-activated protein kinase (ampk) as an energy sensor have motivated development of ampk inhibitors or activators for treating relevant human diseases (such as cancer and diabetes)8. the findings by nguyen et al.6 identifying marchf6 as a hitherto unrecognized nadph sensor will likely have far-reaching impact on our fundamental understanding of nutrient sensing. this study also raises several outstanding questions to inspire future work. how nadph binding of marchf6 induces conformational changes in marchf6 and activates its ubiquitin ligase activity remains unclear; additional structural studies are needed to pinpoint the precise underlying mechanisms. considering the broad effects of nadph on redox maintenance and cellular metabolism, marchf6 is expected to have other cellular functions besides regulating ferroptosis. marchf6 knockout mice and cell lines generated from this study will provide important tools to further dissect its functions in future investigations. notably, other nadph sensors have been identified in eukaryotes9,10. the relative importance of marchf6 compared with other sensors in sensing cellular nadph levels remains to be established. finally, from a therapeutic perspective, this study suggests that marchf6 inhibitors could be developed for cancer treatment. however, considering the perinatal and postnatal lethality phenotypes in marchf6 knockout mice, whether marchf6 inhibitors will cause other complications in patients remains a concern and will require additional studies.lei, g., zhuang, l. & gan, b. nat. rev. cancer 22, 381–396 (2022).cas article google scholar jiang, x., stockwell, b. r. & conrad, m. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 22, 266–282 (2021).article google scholar ju, h. q., lin, j. f., tian, t., xie, d. & xu, r. h. signal transduct. target ther. 5, 231 (2020).cas article google scholar shimada, k., hayano, m., pagano, n. c. & stockwell, b. r. cell chem. biol. 23, 225–235 (2016).cas article google scholar florian, r. t. et al. nat. commun. 10, 4919 (2019).article google scholar nguyen, k. t. et al. nat. cell biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00973-1 (2022).sharpe, l. j. et al. j. biol. chem. 294, 2436–2448 (2019).cas article google scholar hardie, d. g., ross, f. a. & hawley, s. a. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 13, 251–262 (2012).cas article google scholar zheng, x. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 104, 8809–8814 (2007).cas article google scholar kempf, a., song, s. m., talbot, c. b. & miesenböck, g. nature 568, 230–234 (2019).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of experimental radiation oncology, the university of texas md anderson cancer center, houston, tx, usachao mao & boyi ganthe university of texas md anderson uthealth graduate school of biomedical sciences, houston, tx, usaboyi ganyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to boyi gan.b.g. is an inventor on patent applications involving targeting ferroptosis in cancer therapy. c.m. declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmao, c., gan, b. navigating ferroptosis via an nadph sensor. nat cell biol 24, 1186–1187 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00963-3download citationpublished: 08 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00963-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 