understanding, at the atomic level, the effect of the stacking and twisting of different layered two-dimensional materials is a major challenge for the future of twistronics. optical excitations evidence twist-angle-dependent whirlpool-shaped distortions in such materials.you have full access to this article via your institution.a new perspective for materials design has been opened with the ability to isolate and relocate two-dimensional materials, usually laminar in their bulk form. imagine a single-layered material, where all (or most of) the atoms are at the surface. by laying down one on top of the other, the interlayer surface interaction will be playing a role in the entire new system. this defines the field of van der waals heterostructures1. now, imagine that you rotate the crystalline orientation of one layer with respect to the other. for each rotation angle θ, you will have the formation of θ-dependent moiré superstructures (fig. 1a), with different sets of interactions among the atoms from the two different layers. this θ-dependent structure gives rise to the field of twistronics2. now, writing in nature materials, jungcheol kim and co-authors3 report that they have built such a heterostructure by stacking two monolayers of different transition metal dichalcogenides, one monolayer of molybdenum disulfide (mos2) and one of tungsten diselenide (wse2) (fig. 2). then, the authors studied what happens to the bilayer system when stacking them with different twist angles. by analysing the emerging intralayer vibrational modes, they show that strong interactions take place and that these interactions become larger for smaller twist angles (θ <7°).cassiano rabelo.a, top view of two different transition metal dichalcogenide structures rotated by θ = 7°. b, the same as in a with the addition of whirlpool-shaped counter-rotations (−7°) in the top layer, centred on each supercell in the moiré superstructure.cassiano rabelo.the different colours and sizes of the spheres represent the different atoms of mos2 (top) and wse2 (bottom).gaining a clear understanding of what happens to every atom when you stack two monolayers into a van der waals heterostructure with a twist is far from trivial. kim and co-authors, by looking at the way atoms vibrate, realized that whirlpool-shaped periodic lattice distortions arise (fig. 1b). when the two monolayers were coupled, an emerging interlayer breathing mode was observed in their raman spectra, and, by lowering the twist angle θ below 7°, the authors observed increased broadening of this breathing-mode peak. the fuzziness in vibrational frequency is an indication of non-uniform interlayer interaction, as clarified based on first-principles calculations. furthermore, the authors also analysed intralayer atomic vibrations, and identified that the deformations happen mostly on the softer crystal, namely the mos2, with the s atoms facing the wse2 crystal exhibiting much larger changes compared with the se atoms. besides, the local torsion of the mo and the s atoms changes chirality within a moiré unit cell, due to the different local interlayer matchings. the first-principles calculations also show that when the twist angle decreases below 7°, the magnitude of the out-of-plane distortion quickly increases and the average interlayer spacing, as well as the average interlayer distance between the w and the mo atoms, decreases. finally, having established the vibrational structure of their bilayer two-dimensional system, the authors studied the optical reflectance and showed that the exciton energies are generally redshifted, but the energy displacements for the mos2 exciton in a small-twist-angle (θ <5°) van der waals heterostructure were much larger3.this universal θ-dependent behaviour, which is the basis for twistronics, is curious, especially the interesting and pronounced behaviour for small θ. for comparison, the twistronics of graphene has also revealed interesting phenomena, such as twist-angle energy-dependent peaks in the electronic density of states4 for ‘large twist angles’ (θ >2°), strong quasiparticle correlation, including superconductivity5 at the ‘magic angle’ (θ ≈ 1.1°), and atomic reconstruction with the formation of strain domain6 walls for ‘small twist angles’ (θ <1°). these interesting phenomena are always related to the modulation of the emerging moiré superlattice, and in some cases (usually for small angles) generate a mesoscopic confinement of electrons and phonons7, resulting in flat bands and strong correlations8. the work from kim and co-authors shows the universality of these concepts for van der waals heterostructures, in agreement with theoretical expectations9.these results are impactful for materials science in two ways. first, they show the richness of playing with dimensionality at the nanoscale — somehow similar to what has been done by rolling up two-dimensional sheets into nanotubes, now we see novel properties appearing in the θ-dependent superlattices. second, raman spectroscopy is increasing in importance in the field of nanomaterials, always surprising researchers with the deep level of information one can obtain. looking now at a broader perspective, it is astonishing to see the level that nanoscience is achieving. going back two decades at most, materials scientists were struggling to control precisely how to build specific well-designed nanostructures, with bottom-up and top-down approaches. such control is an absolutely necessary step for nanoscience to deliver on the promised wonderful emerging technologies, which are highly sensitive to the structure at the atomic level. the sudden arrival of these intriguing few-atoms-thick, pure-surface, two-dimensional materials has provided a natural platform for materials scientists to create all sorts of new electronic materials utilizing a microscope and a micro-manipulator. now, we are facing all these beautiful and intriguing novelties, including the birth of twistronics, which might represent a significant leap in the transport and control of energy and information, comparable to how the traditional electrical and electronic technologies have shaped up our present lifestyle.geim, a. k. & grigorieva, i. v. nature 499, 419–425 (2013).cas article google scholar carr, s. et al. phys. rev. b 95, 075420 (2017).article google scholar kim, j. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01240-2 (2022).article google scholar li, g. et al. nat. phys. 6, 109–113 (2010).article google scholar cao, y. et al. nature 556, 43–50 (2018).cas article google scholar jonathan, s. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 110, 11256–11260 (2013).article google scholar gadelha, a. c. et al. nature 590, 405–409 (2021).cas article google scholar bistritzer, r. & macdonald, a. h. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 108, 12233–12237 (2011).cas article google scholar naik, m. h. & jain, m. phys. rev. lett. 121, 266401 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartamento de física, universidade federal de minas gerais, belo horizonte, brazilado jorioyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ado jorio.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjorio, a. twistronics and the small-angle magic. nat. mater. 21, 844–845 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01290-6download citationpublished: 27 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01290-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 