a new study uses single-cell and spatial transcriptomics to provide a systematic characterization of the recurrent gene-expression programs that control neoplastic cell states in diverse cancers.you have full access to this article via your institution.cancer cells must acquire a diversity of traits to thrive in a challenging environment, but the molecular programs that coordinate these traits are incompletely understood. a new study provides a systematic characterization of the recurrent gene-expression programs that control these traits in neoplastic cells from diverse cancers at single-cell, and spatial, resolution.the hallmarks of cancer are a well-described collection of essential, recurrent traits that characterize cancer initiation and progression1. hallmarks include the ability to proliferate, to avoid apoptotic cell death and to evade destruction by the immune system. the molecular programs that control these traits are not yet fully resolved. furthermore, far from being homogenous, the neoplastic cells of cancers display remarkable intratumoral heterogeneity, which provides a source of diversity for tumor plasticity and evolution. however, how and when individual cells within a tumor activate distinct programs is not yet understood. a new study by barkley et al. in this issue of nature genetics makes impressive progress in the work of characterizing the recurrent programs used by cancer cells and the role for spatial niches in coordinating some of these programs2.previous studies, in several tumor types, have identified cell states occupied by neoplastic cells, including glioblastoma3, head and neck cancer4 and breast cancer5,6. pan-cancer studies have also been performed, although they have been limited to in vitro cell lines7 or other cell types8. now, barkley et al. use single-cell rna sequencing to generate a substantial new dataset from 19 untreated samples, across 9 cancer types2. integrating these with previously published datasets led to a catalog of 16 transcriptional modules that define the cellular heterogeneity of cancer cells in 15 cancer types.to generate these modules, the authors applied a computational approach, known as ‘non-negative matrix factorization’, to around 20,000 neoplastic cells to identify shared molecular features of their cell states. this integrative approach attempts to minimize technical factors and circumvent the challenge of patient-to-patient heterogeneity, which can frustrate attempts to identify common patterns across tumors. the resulting groups of coordinately expressed genes, or modules, identified both recurrent cancer-cell states (such as cell cycle, epithelial–mesenchymal transition, and interferon response) and lineage-restricted ones (for example, glandular differentiation). although several states have been reported previously3,4,5,7, the current study now demonstrates their presence, through the use of primary human tumor tissue, across multiple cancer types2 (fig. 1).a,b, several gene modules were identified via integration of single-cell rna-sequencing data from cancer cells across a number of diverse solid cancer types (a), and were shown to co-occur within sets of cells to define distinct cancer-cell states (b). integration with spatial transcriptomic profiling highlighted how these hallmarks of cancer-cell states can interact with features of the tumor microenvironment (c). emt, epithelial–mesenchymal transition.a limitation of tissue dissociation–based single-cell profiling is the loss of spatial information related to tissue architecture. recognizing this, barkley et al. also generated matching spatially resolved transcriptomic profiles from a number of tumors2. this method does not provide single-cell resolution but instead relies on computational methods, such as deconvolution, to estimate cell proportions within thousands of ‘spots’ 55 μm in diameter. mapping the individual cancer-cell states, and their co-occurrence with other cell types from the tumor microenvironment, allowed the authors to provide a spatially resolved map of the cellular ecosystems present across multiple cancer types. an important finding of this ‘spatial transcriptomics’ analysis was a close association between cancer cells that express an interferon-response gene module and t cells and macrophages. this well-conserved cell state featured both interferon-induced genes (ifit1) and components of the major histocompatibility class i (hla-a) and class ii (hla-dra) antigen-presentation pathways. interestingly, expression of major histocompatibility class ii is classically reported in professional antigen-presenting cells, rather than in cancer cells. to validate this approach, the authors used a technique, called ‘co-detection by indexing’ (codex)9, that uses optical imaging of fluorescence-labeled antibodies to map 23 antigens at high resolution.to experimentally validate their findings, the authors used a syngeneic mouse model system to highlight both the change in interferon response and the specific location and composition of the local cellular ecosystem associated with the interferon-responsive cancer cells, after lymphocyte perturbation. although it was limited to pancreatic tumors, the controlled perturbation of specific cell states highlights the future translational potential of this research. as targeting the interferon-response pathway is an area of active translational research, it will be important to also confirm functional antigen presentation by cancer cells through experimental assays.cancers have commonly been classified and treated according to their tissue of primary origin. however, more-personalized approaches have been developed to focus on recurrent, pan-cancer oncogenic mutations, with the aim of re-using therapies across malignancies. immunotherapeutic approaches take this paradigm a step further by targeting specific cell types, and their canonical interactions with neoplastic cells, to successfully treat increasing numbers of cancers. a major limitation of these approaches is the unpredictable and clinically challenging phenomena of therapeutic resistance, variable treatment response and resulting metastatic relapse. studies such as this one provide a common framework for describing cell states and interactions, identifying the potential function of spatially organized cell ecosystems within the tumor microenvironment.this study does not comprise, nor does it claim to be, a comprehensive compendium of cancer gene modules. instead, it provides a framework for further research in this area. for example, essential transcriptional programs controlled by the estrogen receptor in breast cancer10 and the androgen receptor in prostate cancer11 were not found in this study; this may be resolved by expansion to a larger number of cases that represent these cancer types. similarly, an exciting area of research will be in recurrent and metastatic disease, to define whether unique modules exist in distant metastatic sites or after the emergence of drug resistance.further work is also needed to understand the genes with recurrent contributions to the definition of modules across cancer types. for instance, prior reports12 have identified hundreds of genes associated with epithelial–mesenchymal transition that drive multiple associated traits, such as cytoskeletal remodeling and invasion; extracellular matrix remodeling; drug resistance; and the acquisition of stem and/or progenitor function. however, in this study, the median number of genes that defined a module was 37 (ref. 2). additional studies should solidify the links between cell states and function and further refine the core genes conserved within each module.such limitations aside, we fully expect that as technology improves and cellular genomics datasets continue to grow, analytical frameworks such as those described here will continue to expand the understanding of the complex cellular heterogeneity across tumors. deeper understanding of cancer cell states and their interactions should lead to new insights into how to ‘corner’ cancers and thereby prevent the acquisition of drug resistance.hanahan, d. & weinberg, r. a. cell 144, 646–674 (2011).cas pubmed google scholar barkley, d. et al. nat. genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01141-9 (2022).article google scholar neftel, c. et al. cell 178, 835–849.e2 (2019).cas article google scholar puram, s. v. et al. cell 171, 1611–1624.e24 (2017).cas article google scholar wu, s. z. et al. nat. genet. 53, 1334–1347 (2021).cas article google scholar jackson, h. w. et al. nature 578, 615–620 (2020).cas article google scholar kinker, g. s. et al. nat. genet. 52, 1208–1218 (2020).cas article google scholar cheng, s. et al. cell 184, 792–809.e23 (2021).cas article google scholar goltsev, y. et al. cell 174, 968–981.e15 (2018).cas article google scholar perou, c. m. et al. nature 406, 747–752 (2000).cas article google scholar network, t. c. g. a. r. cell 163, 1011–1025 (2015).article google scholar cook, d. p. & vanderhyden, b. c. nat. commun. 11, 2142 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencescancer ecosystems program, garvan institute of medical research, darlinghurst, new south wales, australiadaniel roden & alexander swarbrickschool of clinical medicine, faculty of medicine, unsw sydney, sydney, new south wales, australiadaniel roden & alexander swarbrickyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to alexander swarbrick.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsroden, d., swarbrick, a. mapping the cancer cell states conserved across solid tumors. nat genet 54, 1066–1067 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01151-7download citationpublished: 05 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01151-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 