new research reports that targeting the asialoglycoprotein receptor (asgr1) in mice promotes cholesterol excretion through a mechanism involving stabilization of lxr without lipogenesis activation, strengthening the idea of therapeutically targeting asgr1 to lower blood cholesterol and risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.you have full access to this article via your institution.our understanding of cholesterol metabolism has been substantially enhanced by discoveries in human genetics, which have led to several new therapeutic approaches to reducing blood cholesterol and risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ascvd)1,2. genetic variants that reduce function of the asialoglycoprotein receptor (asgr) found within the gene encoding its primary component (asgr1) have been reported to be associated with reduced levels of cholesterol and protection from coronary artery disease3. in an article in nature, wang et al.4 now show that genetic deletion of asgr1 in mice lowers serum and cholesterol and promotes cholesterol excretion through a mechanism involving stabilization of liver x receptor (lxr), without activation of sterol regulatory element binding protein (srebp1) and lipogenesis. both a small interfering rna (sirna) and an antibody targeted to asgr1 were found to lower cholesterol in mice through a similar mechanism. this study helps to explain why genetic reduction in asgr1 reduces cholesterol in humans and advances the concept that hepatic asgr1 could be a therapeutic target in the liver for lowering of cholesterol and risk of ascvd.the asgr is a liver-specific multi-subunit cell-surface receptor responsible for internalizing desialylated glycoproteins (by binding to galactose and n-acetylgalactosamine (galnac) on n-linked carbohydrate chains) and targeting them for lysosomal degradation5. asgr has become a primary focus to efficiently target therapeutics to the liver by conjugating them with galnac6,7; one approved example is the sirna inclisiran that targets hepatic proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (pcsk9) to reduce low-density lipoprotein (ldl) cholesterol8. in 2016, nioi et al.3 reported that two rare loss-of-function variants in asgr1 — an intronic 12 base pair deletion (del12) that leads to activation of a cryptic splice site and a frameshift, as well as a truncating variant (w158x) — were associated with a reduction in plasma cholesterol (specifically the atherogenic non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) and that del12 was also associated with a significantly reduced risk of coronary artery disease. a recent study from the uk biobank reported that a very rare asgr1 missense variant (p.trp264ser) is associated with significantly lower plasma levels of apolipoprotein b (apob; the major protein in atherogenic lipoproteins)9. there has been speculation that asgr might influence the uptake of apob-containing lipoproteins by modulating the catabolism of the ldl receptor (ldlr)4, and there are multiple intersections between protein glycosylation and lipoprotein metabolism10. however, the mechanism of the genetic association of asgr1 with plasma cholesterol has remained unclear.wang et al. have provided important new insights linking the asgr with cholesterol metabolism. mice lacking asgr1 had reduced blood cholesterol and significantly increased biliary cholesterol; promotion of biliary cholesterol excretion is a known mechanism for reduction of plasma cholesterol and has been speculated to be atheroprotective11. importantly, there was no effect on ldl uptake or ldl receptor abundance, suggesting that asgr does not regulate the degradation of the ldlr as was previous hypothesized. protein abundance of the nuclear receptor lxrα — which is critical for whole body cholesterol homeostasis12,13 — was markedly increased, as was expression of several of its known target genes, such as atp-binding cassette subfamily g (abcg)5 and abcg8, that influence biliary cholesterol excretion. deletion of lxrα abrogated the effects of asgr1 deletion on plasma and biliary cholesterol, indicating the central role of lxrα in mediating the impact of asgr1 on cholesterol metabolism. importantly, lxrα has been a therapeutic target of great interest and lxrα agonists have been developed, but this approach has been largely abandoned because of increased expression of srebp1 leading to increased hepatic lipogenesis, fatty liver and elevated plasma triglycerides13. however, in the setting of asgr1 deletion, srebp1 was not increased despite the substantial increase in lxrα. in a series of elegant in vivo studies, the authors established a plausible working model linking the asgr pathway to mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mtorc1) activation and inhibition of amp-activated protein kinase (ampk) (fig. 1). the genetic interruption of the asgr pathway resulted in reduced mtorc1 activation and increased ampk activation (through lysosomal generation of amino acids and other regulatory substrates), with an increase in lxrα protein abundance but simultaneous inhibition of srebp expression. this model was experimentally supported by co-administering an ampk agonist with an lxrα agonist and showing that the srebp-driven lipogenic effects of the lxrα agonist were abrogated by co-administration of the ampk agonist.under physiological conditions (upper panel), agps are internalized by the asgr and targeted to the lysosome. amino acids are generated and serve to stimulate mtorc1 activity and suppress ampk activity, both of which have the effect of promoting lxrα turnover and reducing expression of lxrα target genes such as abcg5 and abcg8. under conditions in which asgr1 is deleted or inhibited (lower panel), lysosomal generation of amino acids is reduced, resulting in lower mtorc1 activation and increased ampk1 activation. this leads to increased lxrα protein abundance and increased abcg5/8 expression. abcg5/8 is a major regulator of hepatic biliary cholesterol excretion, much of which is derived from ldlr-mediated uptake of apob-containing lipoproteins from blood. ce, cholesteryl ester; b, apob.having established that asgr1 may be a therapeutic target of interest, wang et al. used two different targeting strategies of asgr1 in mice — silencing using a specific sirna and inhibition using a specific monoclonal antibody. in both cases, blood cholesterol was reduced and biliary cholesterol was increased; furthermore, the sirna targeting asgr1 was also shown to significantly reduce plasma cholesterol and atherosclerosis in the ldlr–/– mouse model (further confirming that the asgr1 effect is independent of the ldlr). the inhibitory antibody was effective in reducing plasma cholesterol even when added to a statin, which has clear therapeutic implications. these results advance the concept of asgr1 as a novel therapeutic target for lowering cholesterol and potentially reducing risk of ascvd. while an inhibitory antibody is one potential approach, because asgr1 is a liver-specific protein, targeting it with an sirna or antisense oligonucleotide, or even therapeutic genome editing, could be feasible.however, there remain a number of important questions about the physiological role of asgr in hepatic mtorc1 and ampk activation and the specificity and safety of targeting this pathway. many hepatic cell-surface receptors (including the ldlr) target ligands to the lysosome that might be expected to generate nutrients that activate mtorc1 and suppress ampk. furthermore, the consequences of blocking this pathway are uncertain. genetic gain-of-function variants in abcg5 and abcg8 that similarly lead to increased biliary cholesterol excretion are associated with lower blood cholesterol and reduced risk of coronary artery disease, but increased risk of gallstones14. human carriers of the asgr1 del12 and w158x loss-of-function alleles have substantially higher levels of circulating alkaline phosphatase, and while this may be due to reduced clearance of this asialylated glycoprotein, an adverse effect of reduced asgr1 function on the biliary system or liver has not been ruled out (indeed γ-glutamyltransferase levels are modestly elevated in del12 carriers). based on their studies in mice, wang et al. suggest a possible beneficial effect of targeting asgr1 on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease but, to date, human genetics studies have not implicated asgr1 variants in association with this phenotype. more work will be required to determine the effects (beneficial or adverse) of reduced asgr1 function on the liver and on levels of specific circulating sialylated glycoproteins. no humans with biallelic loss of function variants in asgr1 have been reported thus far but will be important to identify and deeply phenotype; of note, the identification of rare individuals who were apparently healthy but completely lacking pcsk9 function helped to provide confidence in the safety of targeting pcsk9 for lowering cholesterol15.in summary, human genetic findings coupled with new experimental evidence in mice from wang et al. strongly link asgr — and particularly its major subunit asgr1 — with hepatic cholesterol metabolism and excretion (mediated at least in part by increased lxrα). together, these findings suggest that asgr1 may be an interesting therapeutic target for inhibition or silencing as an approach to lowering circulating atherogenic lipoproteins and reducing risk of ascvd, once questions about the safety of targeting this pathway are addressed. asgr1 may follow in a line of validated therapeutic targets for lipid lowering (mttp, apob, pcsk9, apoc3 and angptl3) that were initially identified as potential targets through human genetics and characterized for their functional effects on lipid metabolism1, ultimately leading to effective and approved therapies for reducing plasma lipids.rader, d. j. cell metab. 23, 405–412 (2016).cas article google scholar nurmohamed, n. s., navar, a. m. & kastelein, j. j. p. am. coll. cardiol. 77, 1564–1575 (2021).cas article google scholar nioi, p. et al. n. engl. j. med. 374, 2131–2141 (2016).cas article google scholar wang, j. q. et al. nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05006-3 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar igdoura, s. a. curr. opin. lipidol. 28, 209–212 (2017).cas article google scholar rensen, p. c. n. et al. j. med. chem. 47, 5798–5808 (2004).cas article google scholar springer, a. d. & dowdy, s. f. nucleic acid ther. 28, 109–118 (2018).cas article google scholar samuel, e. et al. ann. pharmacother. https://doi.org/10.1177/10600280221105169 (2022).article pubmed google scholar barton, a. r. et al. nat. genet. 53, 1260–1269 (2021).cas article google scholar van den boogert, m. a. w. et al. curr. opin. lipidol. 28, 502–506 (2017).article google scholar rosenson, r. s. et al. circulation 125, 1905–1919 (2012).article google scholar zhang, y. et al. j. clin. invest. 122, 1688–1699 (2012).cas article google scholar russo-savage, l. & schulman, i. g. biochim. biophys. acta mol. basis dis. 1867, 166121 (2021).cas article google scholar william hancock-cerutti, w. & rader, d. j. j. am. coll. cardiol. 63, 2129–2130 (2014).article google scholar cohen, j. c. & hobbs, h. h. science 340, 689–690 (2013).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of genetics, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa, usadaniel j. raderdepartment of medicine, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa, usadaniel j. raderinstitute for translational medicine and therapeutics, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa, usadaniel j. raderinstitute for diabetes, obesity and metabolism, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa, usadaniel j. radercardiovascular institute, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa, usadaniel j. raderyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to daniel j. rader.d.j.r. serves on the scientific advisory boards of alnylam, novartis, pfizer and verve.reprints and permissionsrader, d.j. targeting asgr1 to lower cholesterol. nat metab 4, 967–969 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00623-8download citationpublished: 04 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00623-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 