despite the remarkable success of chimeric antigen receptor (car) t cell therapies in the treatment of hematological malignancies, this strategy remains challenging in solid tumors. one major obstacle is the hostile immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. new research demonstrates that targeting parp11 can overcome this immunosuppression and boost car t cell efficacy through stabilization of ifnar1.you have full access to this article via your institution.car t cell therapy has been revolutionary and produced remarkable responses, especially in the treatment of hematological malignancies with durable remission and persistence of car t cells. however, despite much effort, solid tumors have shown to be largely unresponsive to this therapy. one of the most challenging barriers for the treatment of solid tumors is the tumor microenvironment (tme), which hosts suppressive immune cells such as regulatory t (treg) cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (mdscs) and tumor-associated macrophages (tams) that not only support cancer progression but also create hostile conditions that limit car t cell functionality. multiple strategies have been developed to overcome this immunosuppression, one option being to target immunosuppressive cells or pathways with therapeutic antibodies or pharmacological agents1,2. alternatively, car t cells themselves may be engineered to be resistant to immunosuppression by abrogating the expression of inhibitory receptors on their surface, expressing modified forms of the receptors such as a tgfβ dominant negative receptor or pd1–cd28 chimeric constructs, or enabling the secretion of blocking antibodies1,3. one mechanism by which the tme limits anti-tumor immunity is through inactivation of interferon signaling. type i interferons (ifns) have a significant effect on inhibiting tumor growth and stimulating anti-tumor immune responses4. downregulation of type i ifn receptor (ifnar1) can result in t cell immunosuppression within the tme and reduced efficacy of car t cell treatment5. thus, expression of a stabilized form of ifnar1 was previously shown to enhance car t cell therapy and the efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade5. in this issue of nature cancer, zhang et al.6 identify parp11 as a key regulator of ifnar1 degradation, and subsequently validate parp11 as a new potential target to enhance car t cell function through the upregulation of ifnar1 on car t cells, leading to improved therapeutic efficacy (fig. 1).the tumor microenvironment is composed of immunosuppressive cells like myeloid-derived suppressor cells (mdscs) or regulatory t (treg) cells, which participate in the phenomenon of immune escape. in particular, treg cells are able to induce t cell immunosuppression through the secretion of factors such as tgfβ, prostaglandin (pge2) or adenosine. adenosine modulates t cell activity principally through a2a receptors (a2ars) on the surface of t cells. in the study by zhang et al.6, a2ar signaling is shown to induce parp11 expression, leading to stabilization of the e3 ubiquitin ligase β-trcp. this allows β-trcp to interact with and ubiquitinate type i ifn receptor (ifnar1), which targets it for proteasome-dependent degradation. this degradation leads to a decrease in t cell effector functions, as ifnar1 signaling regulates genes involved in the cytotoxicity, activation, proliferation and viability of t cells. thus, targeting of parp11 through pharmacological or genetic strategies can enhance t cell function within the hostile tumor microenvironment. ctl, cytotoxic t cell.foremost, to decipher the importance of ifnar1 in the biology of intratumoral cytotoxic t cells (ctls), the authors examined intratumoral ctls extracted from tumor-bearing mice expressing a stabilized version of ifnar1 (mutant ifnar1s526a). in comparison to ifnar1s526a ctls, they observed a reduction in cell surface ifnar1 expression in control ctls as well as a downregulation of genes associated with effector functions, activation and cytotoxicity (cd69, ccr7, prf1, ifng, gzmb and il7r). on the contrary, genes related to t cell exhaustion (tox, ctla4 and pdcd1) were significantly increased in control ctls, indicating that the downregulation of ifnar1 by the tme induces a decrease in ctl cytotoxic activity.elegantly, zhang et al.6 mimicked this immunosuppressive environment by co-culturing ova-specific ot1 ctls with mc38-ova tumor cells as well as treg cells. interestingly, treg cell-mediated immunosuppression recapitulated the in vivo results, as control ot1 ctls displayed reduced ifnar1 expression and cytolytic activity. remarkably, ifnar1s526a ot1 ctls were insensitive to treg cell-mediated suppression, supporting the idea that treg cells have a crucial role in the suppressive mechanism triggered by ifnar1 downregulation.treg cells suppress ctl responses through the production of multiple immunosuppressive factors such as adenosine, prostaglandin and tgfβ. zhang et al. identified that adenosine production was responsible for ifnar1 downregulation in ctls, since treg-mediated downregulation of ifnar1 was reversed through the addition of an antagonist of the adenosine receptor (a2ar) in the co-cultures, whilst the addition of tgfβ or prostaglandin did not change ifnar1 expression. the authors provided supporting evidence for the crucial role of adenosine in this mechanism, first by demonstrating that the in vitro cytotoxicity of ifnar1s526a ctls was unaffected by adenosine treatment. second, they showed that the genetic ablation of ifnar1 in cd8+ t cells accelerated growth of mc38 tumors and abrogated the therapeutic effects of the a2ar antagonist cpi-444. this last result is particularly important as it demonstrates that ifnar1 stabilization is a mechanism by which a2ar antagonists are therapeutically effective.having highlighted the central role of tregs and adenosine in ctl immunosuppression, zhang et al. next deciphered the molecular mechanism of ifnar1 regulation, drawing from their previous investigation of this pathway in the context of infection7. indeed, their previous work identified that parp11 mono-adp-ribosylates and thus stabilizes the ubiquitin e3 ligase β-trcp (β-transducin repeat-containing protein), which in turn promotes ifnar1 ubiquitination and degradation. they confirmed these findings by showing that pharmacological inhibition of parp11 promoted stabilization of ifnar1, enhanced ifn signaling and subsequent antiviral responses7. in this current work, zhang et al.6 demonstrated that adenosine stimulated the phosphorylation/ubiquitination and degradation of ifnar1 in jurkat cells. in addition, this ifnar1 downregulation was correlated to the activation of p38α (a protein kinase known to phosphorylate ifnar1; ref. 8) and the upregulation of both β-trcp and parp11. lending further support for this mechanism, deletion of parp11, p38α or β-trcp by crispr–cas9 prevented the adenosine-mediated decrease of ifnar1 expression.next, zhang et al. undertook experiments to validate the central role of parp11 in ifnar1 downregulation. they observed that although parp11−/− ctls responded to adenosine, as detected by protein kinase a phosphorylation, these cells did not upregulate β-trcp, indicating that parp11 is essential to induce β-trcp upregulation following adenosine treatment. importantly, the authors also found that ctls pre-treated with the a2ar antagonist cpi-444 were protected from ifnar1 downregulation induced by adenosine treatment but not by tumor-conditioned media. this demonstrates that other factors present in the tme can also modulate ifnar1 independently of the parp11–adenosine pathway, highlighting the complexity of these immunosuppressive mechanisms and that therapeutic strategies may require targeting of multiple pathways. this is notably the case for the wnt ligands secreted by non-malignant cells within the tme, which can upregulate β-trcp independently of parp11 (ref. 9).on the basis of these promising in vitro results, zhang et al. then validated the involvement of parp11 in ifnar1 regulation in vivo. they isolated ctls from mc38 tumors established in parp11−/− or wild-type mice, and indeed found that parp11−/− ctls expressed more ifnar1 in comparison to control ctls. remarkably, genetic deletion of parp11 in host mice drastically reduced tumor growth in two different solid tumor models, and concomitantly increased the number and activity of intratumoral ctls. importantly, the authors confirmed that parp11-induced immunosuppression is linked to the modulation of ifnar1 expression, since the anti-tumor phenotypes were not observed in parp11−/−ifnar1−/− double-knockout mice.subsequently, zhang et al. investigated whether these results translate to the context of car t cell therapies. foremost, using two different types of car t cell (targeting cd19 or mesothelin) generated from control or parp11−/− t cells, they demonstrated once again the parp11-dependent downregulation of ifnar1 after adenosine treatment. they also showed that mouse parp11−/− anti-cd19 car t cells elicit superior therapeutic efficacy and increased numbers of tumor-infiltrating car t cells in comparison to control anti-cd19 car t cells. importantly, this beneficial effect was not observed in mice treated with double-knockout parp11−/−ifnar1−/− anti-cd19 car t cells, indicating the importance of ifnar1 in this phenotype. driven by these promising results, zhang et al. engineered human anti-cd19 car t cells expressing a parp11-targeting shrna and confirmed that these cells were resistant to adenosine-mediated downregulation of ifnar1. these cells subsequently elicited increased anti-tumor efficacy in vitro and in vivo in comparison to control car t cells. they repeated these experiments using crispr–cas9 to delete parp11 in car t cells targeting mesothelin, providing support for this strategy against solid tumors.crispr–cas9 engineered t cells have recently been evaluated in patients10 (nct03399448) providing a precedent that targeting parp11 via crispr–cas9 in the context of adoptive cell therapy may be a viable strategy. zhang et al. also explored the potential utility of the fda-approved drug rucaparib, which is known to target parp1, parp2 (ref. 11) and parp11 (ref. 7). as with genetic parp11 ablation, they showed that rucaparib prevented the induction of β-trcp and ifnar1 downregulation by adenosine in jurkat cells as well as human anti-mesothelin car t cells. moreover, rucaparib increased the in vivo efficacy of control anti-cd19 car t cells but not parp11−/− anti-cd19 car t cells, suggesting that parp11 has a critical role in the efficacy of rucaparib. nevertheless, as this drug is not restricted to parp11, further research is needed to develop bioavailable par11-specific inhibitors.in conclusion, the work of zhang et al.6 paves the way toward future genetic or pharmacological targeting of parp11 to restore ifnar1 function and improve car t cell efficacy. further work is needed to investigate if this strategy will outperform other efforts to target the same pathway, such as the car t cells engineered to express a stabilized version of ifnar1 that were previously developed by this group5. given the role of adenosine in modulating parp11 expression, direct targeting of a2ar may represent an alternative strategy to interfere with this suppressive signaling12,13,14. however, zhang et al. also showed that induction of parp11 by tumor-conditioned media was not solely adenosine-dependent, suggesting that other factors present in the tme could activate this pathway and thus rendering the targeting of a2ar alone insufficient to modulate parp11 activity. it also remains likely that adenosine-mediated immunosuppression extends beyond stabilization of ifnar1 and therefore comparative studies are warranted. in this context, further analysis of the impact of parp11 targeting in t cells at the transcriptomic, proteomic and epigenetic level is required in order to understand the role of parp11 targeting beyond the regulation of ifnar1, and thus to substantiate support for translation of this strategy into the clinic. finally, it should be noted that in some contexts ifn signaling can be deleterious to t cell responses15. for example, the use of an oncolytic virus expressing ifnβ was shown to lead to car t cell attrition15, an effect that was overcome through crispr–cas9 mediated deletion of ifnar1 on car t cells. whether this result was related to the high concentrations of ifnβ that likely occurred in this context is not known, but it underscores that further studies are warranted to determine appropriate approaches that may be combined with parp11 targeting to effectively armor car t cells to overcome the immunosuppressive tme.mardiana, s. et al. sci. transl med. 11, eaaw2293 (2019).cas article google scholar rafiq, s., hackett, c. s. & brentjens, r. j. nat. rev. clin. oncol. 17, 147–167 (2020).article google scholar rupp, l. j. et al. sci. rep. 7, 737 (2017).article google scholar parker, b. s., rautela, j. & hertzog, p. j. nat. rev. cancer 16, 131–144 (2016).article google scholar katlinski, k. v. et al. cancer cell 31, 194–207 (2017).cas article google scholar zhang, h. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00383-0 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar guo, t. et al. nat. microbiol. 4, 1872–1884 (2019).cas article google scholar bhattacharya, s. et al. j. biol. chem. 286, 22069–22076 (2011).cas article google scholar spiegelman, v. s. et al. mol. cell 5, 877–882 (2000).cas article google scholar stadtmauer, e. a. et al. science 367, eaba7365 (2020).cas article google scholar slade, d. genes dev. 34, 360–394 (2020).cas article google scholar beavis, p. a. et al. j. clin. invest. 127, 929–941 (2017).article google scholar giuffrida, l. et al. nat. commun. 12, 3236 (2021).cas article google scholar kjaergaard, j. et al. j. immunol. 201, 782–791 (2018).cas article google scholar bahl, k. et al. j. immunol. 176, 4284–4295 (2006).cas article google scholar download referencesp.a.b. is supported by a victorian cancer agency mid-career fellowship (mcrf20011).cancer immunology program, peter maccallum cancer centre, melbourne, victoria, australiaisabelle munoz & paul a. beavissir peter maccallum department of oncology, the university of melbourne, parkville, university of melbourne, parkville, victoria, australiaisabelle munoz & paul a. beavisyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to paul a. beavis.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmunoz, i., beavis, p.a. parp11 interfer(on)es with car t cell efficacy. nat cancer 3, 790–792 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00406-wdownload citationpublished: 26 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00406-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 