trapped ion quantum computers can use two different kinds of ion to avoid crosstalk between adjacent qubits. encoding two different qubit types in only one ion species can achieve the same goal while reducing experimental complexity.you have full access to this article via your institution.ions of the same species are completely identical by nature. although this absence of manufacturing variations makes them textbook qubits, it turns into a bottleneck when working with larger groups of qubits because it becomes difficult to control or read out one without affecting others nearby. a solution to this problem is to combine ions of different elements or isotopes that are sufficiently dissimilar from one another to avoid crosstalk issues. however, there is substantial additional overhead in the equipment and calibration needed to operate mixed-species systems. now, as reported in nature physics, haoxiang yang and colleagues1 have used a single ion species to encode and coherently convert between two different qubit types, providing a potentially simpler route to eliminating crosstalk.qubit registers made from trapped ions make use of the strong coulomb repulsion between the charged particles. when they are confined in the same potential, this interaction leads to the formation of joint motional modes that can be used as a ‘quantum bus’, to exchange energy during laser cooling and information via quantum logic gates between the same or different2,3 ion species. the use of different species allows for splitting tasks between cooling4, processing and memory5. it also enables indirect readout6 of information or select ions to serve as a networking interface through optical fibres7 — all without crosstalk during these operations.although this is a viable path, complications often arise from the mass difference between the ions, which complicate the motional mode structure and impact the laser cooling efficiency. further, a separate set of lasers is needed for each species and background collisions mean the ion positions must be carefully tracked to ensure the respective lasers still point at the corresponding ions.however, the rich atomic structure offered by ions, especially those with nuclear spin that feature hyperfine energy levels, provides a way around this issue by encoding different qubit types in the same ion species. each type is denoted by which atomic levels are used to encode the qubit’s logical states (fig. 1a).a, the energy levels of an ion ordered by angular momentum states (l) and their spectroscopic names (s, p, d, f). g-type qubits are encoded in the s ground-state levels of an ion, whereas o-type qubits also include a metastable d level. within a metastable manifold of d or f states, an m-type qubit can be encoded. f manifolds can exhibit very long excited-state lifetimes, but this in turn makes them very hard to access directly from the ground state. b, light scattered by a g-type qubit during detection does not affect the adjacent m-type qubit, providing a way to eliminate crosstalk.ground state (g-type) qubits store quantum information in the atomic energy levels of the lowest angular momentum manifold. this type of qubit has the intrinsic advantage of extremely long coherence. there is effectively no energy relaxation leading to a decay from one qubit state to the other. further, if the respective ion species has a nuclear spin, some of the associated energy levels become first-order insensitive to external magnetic field perturbations, resulting in phase coherence that can be maintained for hours. the disadvantage of this type of qubit is the comparatively small energy-splitting between the logical states. this necessitates the use of carefully stabilized pairs of laser beams to perform multi-qubit operations, and imposes limits on readout and operational fidelities due to off-resonant light scattering from auxiliary energy levels.a second type of trapped ion qubit, the o-type, spans a ground and a metastable state that can have lifetimes reaching seconds. the energy separation between the two states generally corresponds to optical frequencies and hence this qubit can be manipulated directly with a single laser beam, reducing the set-up complexity significantly. the large energy gap also allows for high-fidelity readout as the metastable state is decoupled from the light used to detect the ground-state population. however, the o-type qubit naturally relaxes, putting a stringent limit on its memory coherence. simultaneously, the comparably long lifetime of the metastable excited state is associated with a narrow transition linewidth that needs to be matched by the laser used to manipulate the qubit. hence, these o-type qubits have traditionally been used as optical atomic clocks in frequency metrology laboratories, which have the resources to operate ultra-narrow-linewidth lasers.the third, m-type, qubit encodes the logical states exclusively in two metastable states and is therefore completely separated from the ground state. in this way, a quantum memory can be realized that remains largely unaffected by operations in its vicinity, such as laser cooling and readout. however, the lifetime limit is shared with the o-type and conversion operations involving the ground state, for example, for detection, can impact information stored in adjacent qubits. nonetheless, making use of the m-type qubit has been key to some of the most complex algorithms run on the trapped ion platform8.given the trade-offs for each qubit type, there would be a clear advantage if one could combine and coherently convert between these qubit realizations. this idea was accordingly termed the omg architecture recently9.yang et al. have demonstrated1 dynamic conversion between two types of qubit. using the ytterbium-171 ion species popular in many quantum computing experiments, they coherently converted between a g-type and an m-type qubit encoded in the ion’s longest-living metastable state. here, the two sets of atomic energy manifolds are directly coupled only by a very weak electric octupole transition, creating an obstacle both in the laser requirements and the achievable transfer speed. in order to still be able perform the transfer quickly enough to be compatible with quantum computing algorithms, the teams’ protocol therefore takes a detour through an o-type qubit with a comparably short excited-state lifetime. this relaxes the laser requirements and allows for conversion between the two qubits in less than one microsecond, which is faster than all other quantum operations carried out in the system.as a proof-of-principle demonstration, yang et al. have achieved impressive results with two ions. they demonstrate operations on the g-type qubit such as laser cooling, single-qubit manipulation and state detection (fig. 1b) while keeping crosstalk-induced memory errors on an adjacent m-type qubit to less than 0.06%. future work will have to show that the approach works just as well in systems with more qubits, maintaining similar conversion efficiencies. the conversion between qubit types also allowed the researchers to achieve relatively high readout fidelities for the ytterbium-171 ion qubit, but other species such as calcium-40 and calcium-43 ions typically perform slightly better in this regard10; however, their m-type qubits do not have as long of a meta-stable lifetime as the state in ytterbium chosen by yang et al. as such, many details of the omg architecture remain to be explored and optimized, but the addition of this method for coherent conversion to the quantum information toolbox marks a clear advance for the field.a correction to this paper has been published: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01754-1yang, h.-x. et al. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01661-5 (2022).article google scholar tan, t. r. et al. nature 528, 380–383 (2015).ads article google scholar bruzewicz, c. d., mcconnell, r., stuart, j., sage, j. m. & chiaverini, j. npj quantum inf. 5, 102 (2019).ads article google scholar lin, y. et al. phys. rev. lett. 110, 153002 (2013).ads article google scholar home, j. p. et al. phys. rev. a 79, 050305 (2009).ads article google scholar erickson, s. d. et al. phys. rev. lett. 128, 160503 (2022).ads article google scholar inlek, i. v., crocker, c., lichtman, m., sosnova, k. & monroe, c. r. phys. rev. lett. 118, 250502 (2017).ads article google scholar monz, t. et al. science 351, 1068–1070 (2016).ads mathscinet article google scholar allcock, d. t. c. et al. appl. phys. lett. 119, 214002 (2021).ads article google scholar edmunds, c. l. et al. phys. rev. a 104, 012606 (2021).ads article google scholar download referenceseth zurich-psi quantum computing hub, laboratory for nano- and quantum technologies, paul scherrer institut, villigen, switzerlandcornelius hempelyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to cornelius hempel.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionshempel, c. two qubits for the price of one ion. nat. phys. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01713-wdownload citationpublished: 01 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01713-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 