egfr is an oncogene that is frequently amplified in glioblastoma. a new study suggests a tumour-suppressive role of egfr in egfr-amplified glioblastoma regulated by ligand abundance. increased egfr ligand in egfr-amplified glioblastoma suppresses invasion by upregulating bin3 and inhibiting activation of rho gtpases.you have full access to this article via your institution.the infiltrating gliomas are highly invasive, and the outcome is a function of grade (histology) rather than stage (extent of disease). the 2021 world health organization (who) classification system grades gliomas on the basis of increasing degrees of dedifferentiation, anaplasia and aggressiveness, and also incorporates molecular features1. glioblastoma is the most common primary malignant brain tumour, and among the most lethal of all cancers, with a median survival of only 12–15 months2. amplification of the epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) gene occurs in 57.4% of patients with primary glioblastoma3, and is often associated with the co-amplified glioblastoma-specific mutation egfrviii (deletion of exons 2–7), which cooperate to trigger either ligand-induced or constitutive egfr signalling, and activate distinct and mutually exclusive downstream pathways during progression4,5.egfr is a member of a family of four receptor tyrosine kinases (erbb1–erbb4; also known as her1–her4). seven ligands bind to and activate the mammalian egfr: epidermal growth factor (egf), transforming growth factor-alpha (tgfα), heparin-binding egf-like growth factor (hb-egf), betacellulin, amphiregulin and epiregulin6. egfr ligands are expressed variably in glioblastoma and differ in their binding affinity, kinetics and function6,7. in this issue of nature cell biology, guo et al8. show that the level of egfr ligands determines whether egfr acts as an oncogene or a tumour suppressor in the context of egfr-amplified glioblastoma.both small-molecule kinase inhibitors and antibodies have been developed against egfr but have shown little efficacy in patients with glioblastoma9. there is an urgent need to gain a better understanding of why these targeted therapies fail in patients. possible reasons for this lack of efficacy include: (1) egfr-targeted therapies not being able to penetrate the blood–brain barrier;10 (2) egfr-targeted therapies not effectively inhibiting egfr in the brain;11 and (3) ligand-dependent egfr signalling drives tumour suppression in egfr-amplified glioblastomas, which is now being explored by guo et al. in the current study8.the authors hypothesize that egfr directs two distinct and mutually exclusive pathways (fig. 1). canonical ligand-induced egfr signalling activates downstream pathways including the ras–raf–mek–erk, pi3k–akt, jak–stat and pkc pathways. non-canonical constitutive egfr signalling activates these canonical pathways, and also activates unique effectors including src family kinases (sfks), hepatocyte growth factor receptor (met), and c-src7, which contributes to migration and tumour progression.constitutive egfr signalling is defined as spontaneous dimerization of the receptor in the absence of ligand, which activates tab1, causing phosphorylation of tak1 and downstream phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of nf-κb, which directs expression of epithelial membrane protein 1 (emp1). constitutive signalling results in invasive, large tumours that are poorly proliferative and confers a worse outcome. ligand-activated egfr signalling requires a ligand such as egf, hb-egf or tgfα to activate a signalling cascade in which bin3 inhibits dock7, which normally activates rho gtpases and effectors of invasion. ligand-activated egfr signalling results in less invasive, small tumours that are highly proliferative and confers an improved outcome.in a series of rna interference (rnai) experiments in patient-derived xenograft (pdx) cell lines and primary glioblastoma neurosphere cultures, the authors found that knockdown of egfr without added egf suppressed invasion. rescue experiments using a 3′ untranslated region (utr)-targeted short interfering rna (sirna) showed that egfr-deficient cells became more invasive after overexpression of wild-type egfr, mutant egfrviii or exposure to egf, but overexpression of egfr in these lines suppressed invasion in the presence of ligand. both the abundance of egfr and ligand determined whether egf suppressed or promoted invasion.to determine the underlying mechanism, the authors analysed previous rna microarray data12 and found that bin3 was the most upregulated gene after egf addition. bin3 functions in membrane and actin dynamics and may suppress cancer by mediating signalling between cellular stress factors and regulators of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis13. in glioblastoma cells that express high levels of egfr, bin3 knockout decreased invasiveness after exposure to egf. by contrast, in cells expressing low levels of egfr, bin3 was not upregulated, and exposure to egf induced invasion, which suggests that bin3 is a key negative regulator of invasion.how does bin3 block invasion in the setting of ligand-activated and amplified egfr? using a series of sirna and mass spectrometry experiments to identify bin3-interacting proteins, the authors discovered the guanine nucleotide exchange factor dock7, which regulates the small g proteins rac1 and cdc42, and prioritized further investigation of the protein owing to its known role in hgf-induced invasion of glioblastoma cells14. they proposed that bin3 binding inhibits dock7-mediated activation of rho gtpases and therefore decreases invasiveness.in the absence of egfr amplification, egfr signalling did not affect levels of bin3 but instead drove invasion by upregulating epithelial membrane protein 1 (emp1). the authors had previously shown that emp1 upregulation was associated with constitutive egfr signalling, but not ligand-induced egfr signalling15. to define the mechanism, the authors performed a second series of sirna and mass spectrometry experiments, and identified tgf-beta-activated-kinase 1 (tab1) that bound to egfr in the absence of egf. they then showed that tab1 further activated tak1 and phosphorylated the nf-κb subunit p65, implicating functional involvement of the egfr–tab1–tak1–nf-κb–emp1 pathway in the invasion mediated by constitutive egfr signalling.using a drug screen in a panel of glioblastoma cell lines, the authors identified tofacitinib, a brain penetrant inhibitor of jak1 and jak3, that decreased invasiveness. tofacitinib upregulated bin3 levels and inhibited invasion via robust activation of egfr and upregulation of the egfr ligand hb-egf. in cells treated with saturating levels of egf, tofacitinib did not further increase bin3 levels or inhibit invasion.the authors confirmed the effect of tofacitinib in vivo in several orthotopic pdx models. in these experiments, the authors engineered tumour cells to express the egfr ligand tgfα, so that tumour cells secreted this ligand in an autocrine manner. they observed a modest improvement in survival and decreased invasiveness in a model with low levels of egfr ligand, but not with high levels of egfr ligand, which suggests that tofacitinib treatment may be beneficial for patients with glioblastoma.in summary, the authors conclude that levels of egfr and its ligands determine a proliferative versus invasive phenotype (fig. 1). correlative analyses of the cancer genome atlas (tcga) data using a combined ligand score for all seven egfr ligands demonstrated that in patients with egfr-amplified tumours, low expression of egfr ligands was associated with poor survival. consistent with this analysis, high levels of egfr with low levels of ligands promoted larger, more invasive tumours in mouse models, whereas high levels of both egfr and ligands resulted in less invasive tumours and improved survival. therefore, the authors suggest a stratification strategy for patients that incorporates the levels of egfr ligands and egfr amplification status to determine the best course of treatment. in patients with egfr-amplified glioblastoma and high levels of ligands, egfr-targeted therapy may be counterproductive because egfr acts as a tumour suppressor. however, in egfr-amplified gbm with low levels of ligands, tofacitinib may be an efficacious choice.egfr is amplified most idh wild-type glioblastoma. despite its prominence as a therapeutic target, inhibitors directed against egfr have thus far failed in patients with glioblastoma16. efficient passage of such agents across the blood–brain barrier is a clear problem in the clinical application of kinase inhibitors, as inhibition of egfr in glioblastoma, even in the case of an inflamed barrier that leaks intravenous contrast, is probably too inefficient to result in durable clinical responses. whether distinct ligands differentially affect egfr signalling downstream from egfr is also understood incompletely, as are roles for interactions between egfr and egfrviii. clearly, a deeper understanding of how distinct ligands differentially affect downstream signalling, and our ability to block egfr signalling at multiple nodes both upstream and downstream of this receptor tyrosine kinase, promise to inform future clinical approaches in patients with egfr-amplified glioblastoma.in this regard, the question remains unresolved as to how the current findings affect our treatment regimens using egfr inhibitors. in theory, adapting the current precision-medicine workflow by stratifying patients by their levels of egfr ligand represents an opportunity to improve outcomes but will present practical challenges. first, how and when will a patient’s level of egfr ligands be assessed? second, what clinical benefit, if any, would patients derive from tofacitinib treatment if their cancer has already invaded extensively? the authors proposed using tofacitinib before surgical resection to shrink the tumour mass. however, given that tofacitinib was shown to induce proliferation while suppressing invasion, this may be a risky approach. tofacitinib could be used later in the disease course to prevent or treat recurrence. however, egfr amplification status and levels of ligands will probably need to be reassessed at this later stage as tumours could lose egfr expression or downregulate ligand levels in response to previous treatment.guo et al.8 highlight the complexity of egfr signalling pathways and identify a potential mechanism for the failure of egfr-targeted therapy in glioblastoma. whereas a clinical paradigm that incorporates egfr amplification status as well as levels of egfr ligands may benefit some patients, curative treatment regimens will probably continue to rely on combination therapy. each new drug in a therapeutic regimen adds new selective pressure to the system, and glioblastoma has historically proven recalcitrant to treatment, probably due to our incomplete understanding of the complex signalling networks required for tumour cells to proliferate, invade and develop resistance to treatment. importantly, studies here identified and explored a tumour-suppressive role for egfr signalling in glioblastoma. future work, both in the clinical and basic science realms, will be needed to fully understand whether outcomes in patients with egfr-amplified glioblastoma can be improved by targeting oncogenic functions of egfr, while sparing the potential tumour-suppressive roles for egfr as described here.louis, d. n. et al. neuro oncol. 23, 1231–1251 (2021).cas article google scholar dirks, p. b. et al. clin. cancer res. 26, 2457–2460 (2020).article google scholar brennan, c. w. et al. cell 155, 462–477 (2013).cas article google scholar fan, q. w. et al. cancer cell 24, 438–449 (2013).cas article google scholar chakraborty, s. et al. nat. commun. 5, 5811 (2014).cas article google scholar singh, b. et al. f1000 res. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9025.1 (2016).article google scholar hu, c. et al. nature 602, 518–522 (2022).cas article google scholar guo, g. et al. nat. cell biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00962-4 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar an, z. et al. oncogene 37, 1561–1575 (2018).cas article google scholar de vries, n. a. et al. invest. new drugs 30, 443–449 (2012).cas article google scholar barkovich, k. j. et al. cancer discov. 2, 450–457 (2012).cas article google scholar ramnarain, d. b. et al. cancer res. 66, 867–874 (2006).cas article google scholar prendergast, g. c. et al. biochim. biophys. acta 1796, 25–36 (2009). google scholar murray, d. w. et al. br. j. cancer 110, 1307–1315 (2014).cas article google scholar ramnarain, d. b. et al. cancer res. 66, 867–874 (2006).cas article google scholar le rhun, e. et al. cancer treat. rev. 80, 101896 (2019).article google scholar download referencesmedical scientist training program and graduate program in biomedical sciences, university of california, san francisco, ca, usamary clare beytagh & william a. weissdepartment of neurology, university of california, san francisco, ca, usawilliam a. weisshelen diller family comprehensive cancer center, university of california, san francisco, ca, usawilliam a. weissdepartments of pediatrics and neurological surgery, university of california, san francisco, ca, usawilliam a. weissyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to william a. weiss.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbeytagh, m.c., weiss, w.a. egfr ligands dictate tumour suppression. nat cell biol 24, 1189–1191 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00967-zdownload citationpublished: 01 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00967-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 