ten years ago, the engineering of a small luciferase called nanoluc broke through a common limitation of bioluminescence. currently the brightest known bioluminescent protein, nanoluc’s activity has been used across a huge application range — enabling measurements in single cells and in whole living organisms.you have full access to this article via your institution.the bioluminescent protein luciferase has long been used as a biological tool to analyse the presence of a target without external excitation light. firefly luciferase was first put into practical use mainly as a reporter for gene expression. subsequently, luciferases derived from marine organisms, such as renilla, were used owing to their high emission intensity. however, the luminescence intensity generated by this class of enzymes is limited as it derives from the excitation energy resulting from the oxidation of the substrate luciferin. the generated light intensity is much weaker than that emitted by fluorescent probes, which increases in proportion to the energy of the artificial excitation light. as a result, the application of luciferases in scientific and industrial fields remains limited.nanoluc was engineered from the original luciferase isolated from deep-sea shrimp, oplophorus luciferase (oluc)1,2. oluc is composed of two protein subunits (35 kda and 19 kda), of which the 19 kda protein, designated kaz, catalyses the luminescence reaction using coelenterazine as its substrate3 (fig. 1a). later, nanokaz and nanoluc, which have identical amino acid sequences, with 16 amino acid changes from kaz, were independently developed using directed evolution by two groups, and reported within a short time frame of one another1,4. hall and colleagues developed a coelenterazine analogue called furimazine (fig. 1a) alongside nanoluc (now both commercially available from promega), which afforded a >150-fold boost in luminescence activity over renilla luciferase. its quantum yield was ~0.28 (ref.5), which lies between that of renilla luciferase (0.05–0.1) and firefly luciferase (0.4)1. overall, the increased bioluminescence output was mainly due to the increased catalytic turnover of nanoluc compared with that of kaz1.a | structure of nanoluc (pdb: 5ibo) and the catalytic reaction of the luciferin substrate. b | detection of the protein–protein interaction by the complementation of nanoluc fragments. c | bret by pairing with a fluorescent protein. d | luminopsin for controlling neural activity. the nanoluc protein in a was generated using the pymol molecular graphics system, version 2.0 schrödinger, llc.the performance of the nanoluc–furimazine system widely expanded its bioluminescence application scope beyond use in a conventional gene expression reporter assay to investigate the biomolecular dynamics at the single-cell level. the small size of nanoluc enhanced its use as a fusion tag as it would not affect the function of the fused protein unlike other luciferases.only a few years later, dixon and co-workers dissected nanoluc into two components — a 156-amino acid polypeptide and a 13-amino acid peptide — that were only active when the two fragments were reconstituted into the native conformation6 (fig. 1b). known as nanobit, this complementation reporter could detect the rapamycin-inducible fkbp–frb interaction in mammalian cells, and now serves as a tool for detecting protein–protein interactions in living cells.for fluorescent proteins, colour variants in the visible range enable different objects to be monitored simultaneously. nanoluc only emits blue bioluminescence, which peaks at 460 nm with both furimazine and coelenterazine. connecting a fluorescent protein to a luciferase though provided a means for changing the luminescence wavelength via bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (bret), in which the excited-state energy of the oxyluciferin product in the luciferase non-radiatively excites the connected fluorescent molecule (fig. 1c). by pairing five fluorescent proteins to serve as its acceptor, suzuki and colleagues developed cyan-, green-, yellow-, orange- and red-colour variants of nanoluc, which were referred to as the enhanced-nanolantern series. these variants can be used for multiplex imaging of different components in living cells such as organelles and proteins5.bret can also be used to develop an indicator for biomolecules and ions. for example, calfluxvtn — which has a concatenated nanoluc, a ca2+ binding peptide troponin and the yellow fluorescent protein, venus — served as a ca2+ indicator in hippocampal neurons7. ca2+ binding to the troponin motif induces a conformational change that brings the nanoluc proximal to venus, in which bret affords a longer wavelength emission.bioluminescent indicators can be used for diagnostic purposes on medical samples, but their practical application has not been fully realized because devices capable of detecting their signals have been limited. however, the light emitted from nanoluc, owing to its brightness, can be detected by cameras we conventionally use. for example, a combination of nanoluc-based indicators and a smartphone camera enabled the simple diagnoses of biological samples such as antibodies in blood8.beyond its use as a marker and an indicator, nanoluc has recently been used as a light source in optogenetics — an experimental method that combines optics and genetics designed to spatiotemporally control biological functions in cells of living animals using light. conventionally, optic fibers implanted into the tissue were used as the light source, but this imposes a logistical burden and thus limits optogenetics’ application scope; however, by using nanoluc as an intrinsic light source instead of an external source, a narrower area within living animals can be intensively manipulated by the addition of the substrate. this technical tool termed luminopsin has been used to locally control neural activity in tissues9 (fig. 1d).nanoluc has boosted the importance of bioluminescence as a biological tool in basic science, but its potential for industrial applications has yet to be fully realized. bioluminescence is produced by an enzymatic reaction and does not require any electricity. to this end, the use of bioluminescence to illuminate streets and the interior of homes is being tested in several trials. autonomous glowing plants are currently generated by introducing the genes used for mushroom bioluminescence systems10, but these are not bright enough to be used for lighting. however, the biosynthetic pathway and the corresponding genes involved in coelenterazine production, if identified, could be introduced in combination with nanoluc and its colour variants into plants to generate colourful and bright glowing plants for practical use. overall, nanoluc may afford game-changing technologies for society.hall, m. p. et al. engineered luciferase reporter from a deep sea shrimp utilizing a novel imidazopyrazinone substrate. acs chem. biol. 7, 1848–1857 (2012).cas article google scholar shimomura, o., masugi, t., johnson, f. h. & haneda, y. properties and reaction mechanism of the bioluminescence system of the deep-sea shrimp oplophorus gracilorostris. biochemistry 17, 994–998 (1978).cas article google scholar inouye, s., watanabe, k., nakamura, h. & shimomura, o. secretional luciferase of the luminous shrimp oplophorus graciliostris: cdna cloning of a novel imidazopyrazinone luciferase. febs lett. 481, 19–25 (2000).cas article google scholar inouye, s. et al. c6-deoxy coelenterazine analogues as an efficient substrate for glow luminescence reaction of nanokaz: the mutated catalytic 19 kda component of oplophorus luciferase. biochem. biophys. res. commun. 437, 23–28 (2013).cas article google scholar suzuki, k. et al. five colour variants of bright luminescent protein for real-time multicolour bioimaging. nat. commun. 7, 13718 (2016).cas article google scholar dixon, a. s. et al. nanoluc complementation reporter optimized for accurate measurement of protein interactions in cells. acs chem. biol. 11, 400–408 (2015).article google scholar yang, j. et al. coupling optogenetic stimulation with nanoluc-based luminescence (bret) ca++ sensing. nat. commun. 7, 13268 (2016).article google scholar tomimuro, k. et al. thread-based bioluminescent sensor for detecting multiple antibodies in a single drop of whole blood. acs sens. 5, 1786–1794 (2020).cas article google scholar berglund, k. et al. luminopsins integrate opto- and chemogenetics by using physical and biological light sources for opsin activation. proc. natl acad. sci. usa. 113, 358–367 (2016).article google scholar mitouchkina, t. et al. plants with genetically encoded autoluminescence. nat. biotechnol. 38, 944–946 (2020).article google scholar download referencessanken, institute of scientific and industrial research, osaka university, osaka, japantakeharu nagai & mitsuru hattoriyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to takeharu nagai.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsnagai, t., hattori, m. tiny but bright. nat rev chem 6, 522–523 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570-022-00413-6download citationpublished: 26 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570-022-00413-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 