the standard unit of electric current, the ampere, is one of the seven base units in the international system of units. but measuring a current exactly in amperes is not an easy task. in fact, in 1990, attempts to pin down the ampere were abandoned in favour of using the volt (which measures voltage) and the ohm (which measures electrical resistance) as primary electrical units1 (see go.nature.com/3umryol). writing in nature, shaikhaidarov et al.2 now report a method for producing current in discrete, measurable steps by irradiating a wire that is a few thousand times thinner than a human hair. the approach could be used as a quantum current standard for the ampere — providing a missing piece in electrical metrology. read the paper: quantized current steps due to the a.c. coherent quantum phase-slip effectalthough electrical conduction is a complex phenomenon, on a fundamental level, the transport of charged particles is governed by a surprisingly simple relationship involving the elementary charge (which is equal to the magnitude of the charge on an electron) and the duration or frequency of the process. in principle, this fact can be used to measure current accurately. knowing exactly how many electrons are transferred through a system in a given amount of time can reveal precisely how much charge is transferred — in other words, how much electric current is produced.the concept of basing a current standard on the transport of single electrons emerged around 30 years ago, with the dawn of nanoscale technologies3,4. this development was partly motivated by the difficulty in performing electromechanical experiments to generate a current measured in amperes, using the definition it had then, which was based on the force law proposed by the french physicist andré-marie ampère. in 2019, a revision of four out of the seven base units included a redefinition of the ampere in terms of the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge (see go.nature.com/3umryol).the most popular method for generating a primary reference current for the ampere on the basis of the new definition uses devices called single-electron pumps5. these pumps operate by periodically taking an electron from a source reservoir, depositing it in a small confined area, known as a quantum dot, and then releasing the electron into a drain reservoir, thereby completing the transfer of one electron in each cycle. the accuracy of this electron-transfer process has been improved over the past two decades, so that now a pump that completes one billion cycles will make fewer than 100 errors6. the general consensus7 is that an accuracy of around ten errors per billion cycles is required if the pump is to be used as the primary ampere standard in metrological laboratories.although it is plausible that single-electron pumps can achieve such accuracy, it is difficult to verify this accuracy. the current produced by a single-electron pump is small. the operation frequency of the device is limited to around one gigahertz (1 ghz = 109 hz), and this gives rise to a current on the order of 100 picoamperes (1 pa = 10–12 a). it takes several hours to take enough current measurements to average out noise in order to achieve fewer than 100 errors per billion cycles.obtaining the desired improvement in measurement uncertainty would require a measurement time 100 times longer than this — meaning several days for a single data point. this is too slow to be of practical use. however, because the measurement uncertainty is dominated by noise, the relative uncertainty that can be achieved is inversely proportional to the current level. therefore, increasing the current to one nanoampere would allow a measurement resolution of ten errors per billion cycles to be achieved in several hours. in this regard, the device that shaikhaidarov and colleagues used, known as a quantum phase-slip device, has a considerable advantage over single-electron pumps. the authors demonstrated that their device can be operated at a frequency of up to 26 ghz, producing a current of 8.3 na.the name of the device refers to the physical phenomenon that occurs when magnetic flux ‘tunnels’ across a superconducting nanowire — meaning its quantum-mechanical state hops across the wire8. this tunnelling event has a strange effect on a pair of electrons in the wire, known as a cooper pair. the wave-like nature of cooper pairs can be described by a phase, which is the point in the cycle of the wave at any given time. the magnetic-flux tunnelling has the effect of making this phase shift by one complete cycle — hence the term ‘phase slip’. this phase slip is key, because it can be used to transfer cooper pairs through the nanowire, taking with it a charge that is exactly twice the (negative) elementary charge (fig. 1a).figure 1 | an accurate method for measuring electric current. shaikhaidarov et al.2 used a tool known as a quantum phase-slip device to produce the electric current associated with the movement of pairs of electrons. a, microwave radiation applied to a superconducting nanowire induces magnetic flux to ‘tunnel’ across the wire (yellow arrows), thereby transferring pairs of electrons known as cooper pairs periodically with the same frequency (f) as the microwaves. each electron has a charge of –e, where e is known as the elementary charge, and so the (positive) current that results from the charge transfer is equal to 2ef. b, as the voltage across the wire increases, the current increases. when the wire is irradiated, the transfer of electron pairs creates steps in the current–voltage relationship at multiples of 2ef. these steps could be used as a primary reference for the base unit of current, the ampere.this phenomenon is related to the josephson effect, in which the tunnelling of a cooper pair across a gap between superconducting wires is associated with the transfer of magnetic flux through the gap. when a josephson tunnelling device is irradiated by microwaves of a certain frequency, it produces a voltage step related to that frequency9. this is known as the a.c. josephson effect, and is widely used as the basis for voltage metrology. tunnelling across a nanowirein the equivalent experiment using a quantum phase-slip device, microwaves applied to a superconducting nanowire drive the magnetic-flux tunnelling, periodically transferring cooper pairs one by one with the same frequency as the microwaves. this process generates a quantized current equal to twice the elementary charge, multiplied by this frequency (fig. 1b). and it can happen on a much faster timescale than that associated with electron transfer in single-electron pumps. shaikhaidarov et al. observed current steps that were consistent with this quantization condition in the current–voltage characteristics of a niobium nitride wire. the wire had been embedded in a circuit that was carefully designed to protect it from external noise, and then cooled to 10 millikelvin.shaikhaidarov and co-workers’ result is great news for metrologists. instrument manufacturers and laboratories that calibrate measuring devices — as well as anyone tasked with measuring electric currents precisely — will benefit from the improved accuracy and sensitivity offered by this new approach. however, there is a caveat: the observed current steps are not completely flat with respect to the voltage applied to the device, so the accuracy of the quantized reference level is no more than 10% at present. the authors argue that improved noise filtering would allow the steps to be flat at a level of ten (or fewer) errors per billion cycles, as required for metrological applications. but the accuracy needs to be 10 million times better than that reported, which is a huge mountain to climb.so the race is on: single-electron pumps or quantum phase-slip devices? which would you bet on? as it turns out, there might be no need to choose. the guidelines for the international system of units do not specify how the primary ampere standards should be built. having multiple methods for primary standards has many advantages, such as providing ways to cross-check the results and covering a wide range of current magnitudes. these are benefits that the volt and ohm do not have at present. measurements of the ampere might therefore one day become more accurate and more robust than those of the volt and ohm. on that day, the ampere will regain its pride of place as a base unit in the international system.