although optical communications continue to be the main driver for integrated photonics, new applications are emerging in computing and neural networks. that was the message from this year’s european conference on integrated optics in milan.you have full access to this article via your institution.after the last in-person conference in ghent in 2019, milan welcomed about 250 attendees for the 23rd edition of the european conference on integrated optics (ecio) on 4–6 may 2022. the conference featured two plenary talks, six keynote presentations and 18 invited talks, and was organized around the four thematic areas of integrated photonic technologies and platforms; new physical insights and materials; devices and integrated circuits; and applications of photonic integrated circuits.as conference organizers andrea melloni and francesco morichetti (politecnico di milano) explained: the choice of topical areas reflects the evolution of the conference and the field of integrated optics, which over the last few years has become much broader, pervasive and mature. applications include more traditional sectors, like communications, as well as newer areas, like optical computing (classical and quantum), programmable photonics, machine learning and neural networks, on-chip systems for advanced imaging, metrology and sensing.indeed, what became increasingly clear during the conference is that the field is still mainly driven by optical communications and interconnects, as discussed in several keynote and invited talks. many presenters pointed out the considerable progress that has been made in the past decade and the high level of industrial interest that the field has elicited. as melloni continued: in the communication field there is a never-ending request for higher data throughput and less energy-per-bit consumption. this translates in a continuous effort towards the development of more efficient integrated sources, modulators and detectors.these themes were echoed by haisheng rong (intel), who began his keynote presentation by remarking that important milestones in integrated photonic circuitry have exhibited a trend of increasing bandwidth and lowering power consumption. he first presented the latest achievements at intel in integrated modulators and photodetectors: we have demonstrated silicon micro-ring modulators that are capable of transmitting data at up to 240 gb s−1 as well as all-silicon photodetectors that can detect high-speed data at 112 gb s−1 at the datacom wavelength of 1,310 nm. regarding the increase of bandwidth density, he also spoke about integrated laser sources: we have designed and fabricated multi-wavelength dfb [distributed feedback] lasers that are fully integrated on a 300 mm silicon wafer together with silicon micro-ring modulators and detectors. the lasers deliver excellent output power uniformity and wavelength spacing uniformity that exceed industry specifications.besides the latest research on links, the conference also featured emerging applications. all-optical computing, optical neutral networks and reconfigurable circuits, among other areas, were discussed in the two plenary presentations by vorkel sorger (george washington university) and paul prucnal (princeton university), as well as in the invited talk by wim bogaerts (ghent university). in this space, the attractive benefits of photonics were summarized by sorger: photonics offers seamless operation processing. multiplication is done in an electro-optical device by simply sending data through it. this takes picoseconds versus nanoseconds in electronics. addition is done simply in a detector, which is incoherent, but is even simpler for coherent signals. he later added: the best item is probably the free fourier transformation which is performed completely power-passively by lenses. this enables efficient convolution operations, which make up 90% of all machine learning operations.here, the main requirements for the successful deployment of photonic computing technologies are high throughput (namely operations per second), low latency and low power usage, typically combined in terms of operations per joule (op j−1). excitingly, sorger’s photonic tensor core can now perform 25 top j−1, which improves to above 100 top j−1 for processing analogue signals. these numbers are now approaching, and even surpassing, commercial gpu performance, which typically run at about 5 top j−1. these developments promise considerable improvements in basic operations such as convolution and matrix multiplications, with applications in deep lidar, drones and augmented reality, among others.challenges remain, however. one of the key hurdles is the reduction of optical losses, especially by improving optical input/output chip coupling. high packaging and testing costs are also common to all applications of integrated photonics, as they currently account for 70–90% of the entire process cost. as sorger continued: fiber attach processes do not scale. photonic wire bonding is one emerging option to integrate the laser heterogeneously. iii–v is actually a great tech as it’s all monolithic, but just too costly for mainstream. in addition, photonic chips should be fully packaged in a ‘plug and play’ format, so that they can interface seamlessly with electronic control boards.overall, ecio 2022 delivered a clear message that all-optical interconnects and computing units may be at the dawn of being commercialized. looking ahead, the conference was animated by an atmosphere of confidence that integrated photonic technologies will become pervasive and lead to disruptive technological changes across many sectors, ranging from the more mature communication field to the emerging areas of optical computing, sensing, imaging and healthcare. as nicely summarized by kevin williams (tu eindhoven), photonic circuits will be everywhere, thus setting a bright path ahead, hopefully mirroring the success of (micro)electronics that we have witnessed in the past century.nature photonics https://www.nature.com/naturephotonicsgiampaolo pitruzzelloyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to giampaolo pitruzzello.reprints and permissionspitruzzello, g. new frontiers for integrated photonics. nat. photon. 16, 559–560 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01049-0download citationpublished: 29 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01049-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 