a micropillar cavity that can impart a phase shift to single photons offers a promising route to scalable quantum information processing with light.you have full access to this article via your institution.quantum information processing (qip) with light, as demonstrated by the first photon–photon quantum gate 20 years ago1, is highly attractive as it offers the promise of a computational advantage over conventional processors2,3. however, with many optical qip approaches, such as those employing atoms or quantum dots, it is experimentally very challenging to scale up to a large number of processing elements4,5.although many different architectures for qip are actively being explored, it is often desirable to find a way to accomplish a nonlinear optical phase shift, so that one photon can induce a phase shift on the order of π for another. off-the-shelf nonlinear crystals are not suitable for this purpose because they have nonlinearities that are many orders of magnitude too small.in this respect, experiments with ultracold atoms have been very successful in recent years. they have demonstrated a single-photon phase shift of π, and recently a photon–photon quantum gate with an impressive efficiency6,7,8,9. however, scaling up cold-atom experiments is non-trivial because considerable efforts are needed to keep the atoms cold and in the right place. this difficulty is avoided in solid-state systems. a prominent system is quantum dots, which have been under investigation for decades and have demonstrated a single-photon phase shift of π/6 (ref. 10). however, experiments with quantum dots are also non-trivial to scale because the dots’ resonance frequencies, which are used for interactions, tend to differ substantially from one another and additionally tend to drift considerably over time.now writing in nature photonics, kuriakose et al. report a single-photon phase shift in a system that should be much easier to scale up as it is based on micropillar cavities fabricated on a solid-state substrate11.the micropillar is a cuboid with bragg mirrors at two opposing ends, thus forming a fabry–pérot cavity. each bragg mirror consists of a stack of aluminium–gallium–arsenide layers, in which neighbouring layers differ in their aluminium concentration. between the two bragg mirrors, there is a quantum well. if a photon is inside the quantum well, it can be absorbed to promote an electron from the valence band to near the band edge of the conductance band, creating a bound electron–hole pair called an exciton. furthermore, because of this coupling between photons and excitons, the elementary excitations inside the quantum well are neither pure photons nor pure excitons. instead, they are superpositions of both, mixed light–matter quasiparticles called exciton–polaritons. such micropillar cavities have been studied since the 1990s12; however, in recent experiments more than one exciton–polariton has been confined inside the quantum well. in this situation, the exciton–polaritons interact with each another. when coupling light in and out of the quantum well through the bragg mirrors, this interaction between exciton–polaritons manifests itself as an effective interaction between photons.kuriakose et al. have now measured the single-photon phase shift created by this effective light–light interaction. to measure it, they exploit that the phase shift depends on the polarization of the incoming light. a detailed analysis shows that the eigenvectors of the system are the two forms of circular polarization (left- and right-handed) — one of which experiences a large nonlinear phase shift, whereas the other is hardly affected by the other light field. this offers a simple way of measuring the single-photon phase shift. the researchers send linearly polarized light onto the micropillar (fig. 1); this can be written as a superposition of left- and right-hand circular polarization components. only one of the circular components picks up a noticeable single-photon phase shift on transmission through the micropillar, which results in a polarization rotation, much like in faraday rotation. the polarization rotation is measured in the light transmitted through the micropillar.a linearly polarized signal beam and a circularly polarized control beam are combined using a beam-splitter and focussed onto the micropillar. the transmitted light is then filtered by a spectrometer to remove the control beam, and the polarization of the signal beam is analysed using a polarizing beam splitter (pbs) and a pair of avalanche photodiode (apd) detectors. the half-wave plate (hwp) is used to rotate the linearly polarized light diagonally (d) or anti-diagonally (a). credit: adapted from ref. 11, springer nature ltd.in the present experiment, the single-photon phase shift is not very large yet; it amounts to just 3 mrad, which is three orders of magnitude below the ultimate goal of π. however, a variety of aspects about the fabrication of the micropillar cavity can be modified. theory suggests that careful optimization of the system should make much larger single-photon phase shifts feasible, ideally up to the desired value of π. the present observation of a non-zero phase shift is a decisive step because it shows that the approach is feasible and merits future optimization.the transmission of the micropillar is another point that will need improvement in the future. in the present experiment, each photon is transmitted with a probability of approximately 40%, which is problematic, in particular if one were to cascade several micropillars. however, it is expected that the transmission can be increased above 90% by optimizing the micropillars, which would make this aspect much less of a problem.as of now, other optical qip approaches can achieve much better performance than the micropillar cavities. however, the present experiment proves that micropillars are an interesting platform for generating a single-photon phase shift. if the micropillars can be optimized as currently expected, they will stand a good chance of becoming competitive. at that point, the easier scalability of the micropillar cavities might give them a decisive advantage.o’brien, j. l., pryde, g. j., white, a. g., ralph, t. c. & branning, t. c. nature 426, 264–267 (2003).ads article google scholar zhong, h.-s. et al. science 370, 1460–1463 (2020).ads article google scholar madsen, l. s. et al. nature 606, 75–81 (2022).ads article google scholar li, y., humphreys, p. c., mendoza, g. j. & benjamin, s. c. phys. rev. x 5, 041007 (2015). google scholar rudolph, t. apl photon. 2, 030901 (2017).ads article google scholar volz, j., scheucher, m., junge, c. & rauschenbeutel, a. nat. photon. 8, 965–970 (2014).ads article google scholar tiarks, d., schmidt, s., rempe, g. & dürr, s. sci. adv. 2, e1600036 (2016).ads article google scholar hacker, b., welte, s., rempe, g. & ritter, s. nature 536, 193–196 (2016).ads article google scholar stolz, t. et al. phys. rev. x 12, 021035 (2022). google scholar fushman, i. et al. science 320, 769–772 (2008).ads article google scholar kuriakose, t. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01019-6 (2022).article google scholar weisbuch, c., nishioka, m., ishikawa, a. & arakawa, y. phys. rev. lett. 69, 3314–3317 (1992).ads article google scholar download referencesmax-planck-institut für quantenoptik, garching, germanystephan dürryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to stephan dürr.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdürr, s. micropillars for single-photon phase shifts. nat. photon. 16, 554–555 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01040-9download citationpublished: 29 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01040-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 