longitudinal data spanning 43 years from a wild ungulate population reveal changes in social connectedness as individuals age, and suggest that these changes may in part be driven by changes in spatial behaviour.you have full access to this article via your institution.the importance of social connections for the health and biological fitness of group-living animals is now well-established1. but increasingly it has become apparent that social relationships are not static and can change across the lifespan. patterns of ‘social ageing’ have garnered much interest among social psychologists and biogerontologists2, as social isolation among older humans is a mounting health concern3. differences between young and old individuals in the number of social partners and in the amount of time spent on social behaviour have also been well-demonstrated across a wide range of nonhuman primates4,5,6,7, but few studies have looked beyond primates for evidence of this phenomenon (for example, refs. 8,9). writing in nature ecology & evolution, albery et al.10 provide the first evidence that age can drive changes in social connectedness in a wild ungulate, and go beyond many previous studies of social ageing by testing the mechanisms that might underlie these declines.albery et al.10 make use of an impressive long-term dataset from a wild population of european red deer (cervus elaphus) that have been studied for over 40 years on the isle of rum, scotland. using group-based association data (in which individuals within about 10 m were assumed to be associating), they find evidence that ageing female deer show declines in several correlated metrics of social connectedness, including average group size, number of unique partners and frequency of association with social partners (fig. 1).as ‘jane’ ages, her number of social partners, frequency of association and group size decline. this is associated with changes in spatial behaviours (such as movement to lower-quality habitat), although it is not known which is cause and which is effect.crucially, because the authors have longitudinal data on over 900 individuals, they are able to demonstrate that these changes in sociality with age result from within-individual declines in social connectedness. sociality, as with many other traits, may change across an individual’s lifetime and progress as a result of physical or cognitive deterioration, changes in motivation, or enhanced skill and experience, among other possibilities11. however, not all age-related changes in sociality necessarily emerge from within-individual changes, but instead might result from population-level processes. for example, if more-social individuals are more likely to die because of increased competition or exposure to disease, then an age-based decline in sociality with age might appear without necessitating any within-individual decline (that is, selective disappearance)12. to date, most studies on nonhuman animals have lacked the longitudinal data to differentiate between these drivers. albery and colleagues10, however, are able to demonstrate that age-based changes are not driven by selective disappearance or the deaths of social partners. instead, they provide support for the idea that the social phenotype, similar to other physiological, morphological or behavioural traits, is an attribute of individuals that can senesce.having demonstrated that changes in sociality with age in red deer are indeed within-individual, the authors explore what specifically might be changing in an individual’s behaviour to bring about these declines in connectedness. an important possibility, particularly in highly fluid fission–fusion social systems like that of red deer, is that social connectedness might be strongly influenced by changes in movement as individuals age. to assess this, albery and colleagues10 look at the effects of age on a suite of spatial behaviours and find that females occupy smaller home ranges as they get older, and tend to be found at the edges of the population in areas of lower density and lower-quality grazing (fig. 1). they find that altered spatial behaviour explains a substantial portion of the changes in sociality but does not fully supplant the negative effects of age in all models. the authors suggest that this provides evidence that social senescence seems to be driven in part, although not wholly, by altered spatial phenotypes with age.importantly, as the authors acknowledge, these models are correlative rather than causative, and it is therefore equally plausible that changes in spatial behaviour could be the by-product of changes in social behaviour. for instance, changes in spatial behaviour such as occupying lower-quality habitat might be driven by physical changes (for example, musculoskeletal decline), resulting in social declines that arise from habitat selection. however, it is also possible that older red deer are being competitively excluded from high-quality grazing habitat. in the latter case, changes in social behaviour lead to changes in spatial behaviour, which further facilitates declines in social connectedness. in-depth behavioural data that can better elucidate shifting patterns of affiliation and aggression are necessary to more conclusively tease apart the directionality of this relationship.nevertheless, those who recognize the need for research on social ageing to move beyond descriptive studies to a more holistic understanding of how and why these patterns emerge11 will welcome the effort made in this paper to illuminate the mechanistic causes of age-based changes in sociality. as one of the few studies to show evidence of social ageing outside of primates, these results offer evidence that social senescence may be pervasive in social mammals and illustrate the need for studies in more-diverse systems to provide comparative insights into the causes and consequences of social ageing. although the study of senescence in wild populations has increased in the past couple of decades13, the incorporation of social connectedness into the myriad of traits that can change with age has been more recent11. given the strong association between sociality and fitness1, age-based changes in sociality are likely to have a vital role in shaping biological ageing and health in later life. moving forward, the study of social ageing will provide a critical window into the processes that facilitate age-based fitness declines in natural populations.snyder-mackler, n. et al. science 368, eaax9553 (2020).cas article google scholar wrzus, c., hänel, m., wagner, j. & neyer, f. j. psychol. bull. 139, 53–80 (2013).article google scholar steptoe, a., shankar, a., demakakos, p. & wardle, j. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 110, 5797–5801 (2013).cas article google scholar almeling, l., hammerschmidt, k., sennhenn-reulen, h., freund, a. m. & fischer, j. curr. biol. 26, 1744–1749 (2016).cas article google scholar rosati, a. g. et al. science 370, 473–476 (2020).cas article google scholar schino, g. & pinzaglia, m. am. j. primatol. 80, e22746–e22747 (2018).article google scholar machanda, z. p. & rosati, a. g. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 375, 20190620 (2020).article google scholar kroeger, s. b., blumstein, d. t. & martin, j. g. a. phil. trans. r. soc. lond. b 376, 20190745 (2021).article google scholar weiss, m. n. et al. proc. r. soc. lond. b 288, 20210617 (2021). google scholar albery, g. f. et al. nat. ecol. evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01817-9 (2022).article pubmed google scholar siracusa, e. r., higham, j. p., snyder-mackler, n. & brent, l. j. n. biol. lett. 18, 20210643 (2022).article google scholar nussey, d. h., coulson, t., festa-bianchet, m. & gaillard, j. m. funct. ecol. 22, 393–406 (2008).article google scholar nussey, d. h., froy, h., lemaître, j.-f., gaillard, j.-m. & austad, s. n. ageing res. rev. 12, 214–225 (2013).article google scholar download referencesschool of psychology, centre for research in animal behaviour, university of exeter, exeter, ukerin r. siracusayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to erin r. siracusa.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionssiracusa, e.r. social senescence in red deer. nat ecol evol 6, 1062–1063 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01766-3download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01766-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 