an experiment with photonic waveguides demonstrates the connection between non-abelian holonomies and adiabatic particle transport, paving the way to the geometric and topological control of light trajectories.you have full access to this article via your institution.gauge symmetries are a cornerstone of physics. they emerge in condensed-matter physics, in particle physics and in both the classical and quantum description of gravity. as first noted by wilczek and zee, gauge symmetries and the corresponding gauge fields also arise in the description of simple quantum-mechanical systems1. now, writing in nature physics, yi-ke sun and co-workers have unveiled the effects of the wilczek–zee gauge connection on light propagation in photonic waveguide lattices with their successful observation2 of non-abelian thouless pumping3 of light.thouless pumping4 refers to the transport of charge confined by a lattice potential in the absence of any external bias by cycling the potential adiabatically in time. it is a modern take on the archimedean screw — a machine by which the ancient greek inventor managed to lift water in a pipe trough rotation of the device. analogously, an adiabatic and cyclic deformation of the underlying hamiltonian allows the transport of quantum particles in a periodic lattice.in the thouless version of the archimedean screw, the pumped particle current does not depend on the rotation of a screw but on how the structure of the hilbert space changes during the pumping cycle. as a result, the charge that is pumped is a geometric, intrinsically robust quantity that bears the signatures of the hilbert space topology. in the abelian case, thouless pumping is indeed considered a natural probe of berry’s geometric phase5 and of the chern number of a band6.thouless pumping can simultaneously generate a rotation of the state in the degenerate subspace and a displacement (fig. 1). as both these transformations have a geometric origin, thouless pumping can serve as a measure of the geometric and topological evolution of the band structure. this behaviour is similar to another archetypal topological transport phenomenon — the quantum hall effect.white circles and red arrows represent, respectively, the lattice site positions and the system’s state vector |ψ0〉 and |ψ1〉. non-abelian pumping leads to a displacement along the lattice and a rotation among two degenerate subbands. both these transformations are related to the wilczek–zee holonomy. the peculiar structure of the evolution featuring two π/4 rotations separated by a displacement highlights the non-abelian character of pumping. the evolution of the state vector in a non-abelian thouless pumping cycle is reminiscent of helical motion, as depicted in the lower panel.the non-abelian thouless pump realized by sun and co-workers belongs to a class of quantum phenomena that appear when a multidimensional degenerate subspace of the hilbert space, which depends on a set of classical parameters, is transported in its entirety along a path in parameter space. the system is initially prepared in a degenerate state and it undergoes a geometric transformation called a wilczek–zee holonomy1 (fig. 1), which is the non-abelian analogue of the berry’s phase.during the evolution, the system’s wavefunction thus acquires not just a geometric phase factor but a geometric unitary matrix bearing the signature of the non-abelian gauge structure. in this scenario, standard abelian thouless pumping yields a particle current in the occupied band, whereas non-abelian pumping generates a particle current and a unitary transformation among the degenerate states; these are generated at the same time and are related through the non-abelian stokes theorem, signifying their geometric nature.in their work, sun and colleagues achieved non-abelian thouless pumping of light with an array of modulated optical fibres that formed a photonic non-abelian lieb lattice, in which the degeneracy of the bands is enforced by the lattice symmetry. following a recent proposal3, they demonstrated non-abelian thouless pumping by preparing the system in a wannier state belonging to a degenerate subband, and by simultaneously measuring the photon beam displacement and the holonomy transformation generated by a pumping cycle.the outcomes of the experiment agreed with the theoretical predictions, demonstrating the geometric nature of the transformation. to prove its non-abelian character, the team then designed two cycles that give rise to different non-commuting holonomies and they showed that ordering matters by performing a sequence of the two cycles. this dependence on the order of operations is a hallmark of non-abelian processes. furthermore, sun and co-workers showed the scalability and universality of non-abelian thouless pumping. to this end, they performed sequences of three different pumping cycles in different order — fully exploring the algebra of the generators of su(2) transformations.as an additional test of the geometric and topological nature of non-abelian thouless pumping, sun and co-workers presented a preliminary investigation of the effects of disorder, showing the robustness of pumping. the accuracy and potential generalizability of the experiment was guaranteed by using femtosecond laser writing to fabricate the samples. this technique gives large flexibility in designing the lattice model and in tuning the lattice parameters, and it allows the realization of complicated pumping and braiding cycle sequences.the experiment by sun and colleagues represents one of the few observations so far of the non-abelian wilczek–zee holonomy. but by employing thouless pumping as a tool for probing non-abelian topological physics, it also paves the way for the geometric control of photon states and light trajectories in real space — a fundamental step in the direction of photonic information processing.furthermore, sun and co-workers’ results prompt the question of whether it is possible to perform similar experiments with bosonic or fermionic particles. it would be interesting to observe analogous effects in solids, where the interplay between non-abelian effects and electronic correlations may lead to phenomena such as fractional topological charges and higher order topological phases.wilczek, f. & zee, a. phys. rev. lett. 52, 2111 (1984).ads mathscinet article google scholar sun, y.-k. et al. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01669-x (2022).article google scholar brosco, v., pilozzi, l., fazio, r. & conti, c. phys. rev. a 103, 063518 (2021).ads article google scholar thouless, d. j. phys. rev. b 27, 6083 (1983).ads mathscinet article google scholar berry, m. v. proc. r. soc. lond. 392, 45–57 (1984).ads google scholar lu, l., joannopoulos, j. d. & soljačić, m. nat. phys. 12, 626–629 (2016).article google scholar download referencesinstitute for complex systems, national research council (isc-cnr), rome, italylaura pilozzi & valentina broscoresearch center enrico fermi, rome, italylaura pilozzi & valentina broscodepartment of physics, university sapienza, rome, italyvalentina broscoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to laura pilozzi.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionspilozzi, l., brosco, v. thouless pumping of light with a twist. nat. phys. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01675-zdownload citationpublished: 28 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01675-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 