flexible all-perovskite tandem photovoltaics open up new opportunities for application compared to rigid devices, yet their performance lags behind. now, researchers show that molecule-bridged interfaces mitigate charge recombination and crack formation, improving the efficiency and mechanical reliability of flexible devices.you have full access to this article via your institution.perovskite solar cells possess two key features. first, the tunability of the chemical composition of the absorber allows perovskite solar cells with complementary absorption to be stacked into a tandem configuration and deliver higher performance than single-junction solar cells1. second, they can be processed on flexible plastic substrates, lowering device weight, installation costs and energy-payback times compared to their rigid counterparts. these attributes make the technology well-suited for different applications, from building- or vehicle-integrated photovoltaics (pv) to high-altitude and space pv2. there are, however, challenges in the exploitation of these features. tandem devices are limited by non-radiative charge recombination at the interfaces between the perovskite layer and the charge transport layers which reduces the external radiative efficiency of the device stack. this is particularly the case in wide-band gap perovskite cells due to more defective interfaces, transport layers energetically misaligned with the perovskite, halide segregation and/or increased crystal strain3,4. additionally, the fabrication of flexible perovskite solar cells is much more challenging than that of rigid devices due to the restriction to low-temperature processes for all layers to avoid damaging the plastic substrate. as a consequence, flexible perovskite solar cells have only achieved efficiencies of ~21%.writing in nature energy, lijun zhang, hairen tan, and co-workers across china and canada devise an approach to minimize interfacial recombination losses in the wide-bandgap sub cell of a perovskite tandem while improving the mechanical properties of the devices processed on flexible plastic foils5. the researchers introduce a molecular bridge based on a combination of two self-assembled monolayers (sams) between the hole transport layer nickel-oxide (niox) and the perovskite which passivates interfacial defects, improves the interfacial energy alignment and acts as a stress buffer layer. this leads to a 24.4% efficient flexible all-perovskite tandem solar cell with improved bending durability.sams are currently extensively investigated by the community as they are highly effective at suppressing charge recombination at the interface between the perovskite and the rigid indium tin oxide electrode6. in their work, tan and colleagues use a mixture of two sams (2pacz and meo-2pcaz, illustrated in fig. 1a) anchored to the niox layer. use of these sams led to a significant reduction of interfacial recombination resulting in a nearly lossless contact and hence an improved open-circuit voltage (voc). to understand this behaviour, tan and team use ab initio density functional theory simulations. they find that the improved open-circuit voltage (voc) is due to the passivation of deep defects (for example, pb-interstitials or pb-antisites) at the perovskite surface in contact with the sam-treated niox layer. passivation occurs by the formation of a chemical bond between the pb of the perovskite and the phosphoryl group of the 2pacz layer. in addition, the phosphoryl group can stabilize deep defects related to the oxygen vacancy on the niox surface.a, the chemical structures of the self-assembled monolayers used in the study of tan and colleagues: 2pacz ([2-(9h-carbazol-9-yl)ethyl]phosphonic acid) and meo-2pacz ([2-(3,6-dimethoxy-9h-carbazol-9-yl)ethyl]phosphonic acid). b, temporal evolution of the power conversion efficiencies of flexible single-junction and tandem solar cells based on different photovoltaic absorbers. the result achieved by tan and team — using a combination of two self-assembled monolayer molecules shown in panel a — is marked with a star. panel a adapted from ref. 5, springer nature ltd.the different molecular dipole moments of the two sams allow precise tuning of the energy level alignment between the hole transport layer and the perovskite layers by tuning the ratio of the mixture. interestingly, an optimum device performance was reached when the valence bands of the sam-functionalized niox and the perovskite were energetically aligned. these results contribute to the ongoing debate in the literature as to the importance of energy alignment between the perovskite and the transport layers.overall, both effects — passivation and energy alignment — result in a substantially improved performance of the flexible all-perovskite tandem solar cells upon introduction of the molecular bridge. with a 3:1 2pacz:meo-2pcaz ratio, the researchers showed an enhancement of the voc from 1.15 volt (v) to 1.22 v (for a wide-gap perovskite with a bandgap of 1.75 electronvolt (ev)), achieving a certified efficiency of 24.4% — the highest among all types of emerging flexible thin-film solar cells reported to date with the exception of gaas devices (fig. 1b).in addition, tan and colleagues examined the mechanical properties of the flexible tandem cells. they found negligible efficiency losses in the molecularly-bridged device compared to a 60% relative loss in the reference device after 104 bends with a 10 mm radius. this was attributed to the bridging layer’s ability to increase the adhesion of the perovskite on niox and to absorb the generated stress during the bending process. both effects limit the formation of macroscopic cracks in the perovskite layer and the indium-tin oxide.although the approach devised by tan and colleagues allow to gain control over interfacial recombination in wide-gap triple cation perovskites, the devices demonstrate a significant (~10%) drop in the performance after 150-h of operation under maximum power point tracking. long-term stability is clearly a big challenge for all-perovskite tandems. the devices suffer from light-, moisture- and oxygen-induced compositional instabilities7. among these instabilities, ion migration is a major cause for aging-induced efficiency losses8. moreover, wide- and low-gap perovskites present different degradation modes. the former suffers from halide segregation while the latter from the oxidation of sn2+ to sn4+ (ref. 9). low-gap perovskites in particular are far from being able to meet the international electrotechnical commission standards such as maintaining the initial efficiency under illumination and damp heat (85°c, relative humidity of 85%) conditions over 1,000-h. among the various environmental stress factors, moisture is particularly critical to flexible perovskite solar cells as the flexible substrates are subject to higher water vapour transmission rates than glass-based substrates. this could prove to be a major roadblock for commercial applications. future work should therefore study the origin of the various degradation mechanisms. to do so, it will be key to devise specific and accelerated stress tests beyond the international electrotechnical commission tests to uncover the degradation pathways specific to perovskite pv10.all-perovskite tandem cells exhibit an efficiency potential on par with other promising emerging tandems such as the si/perovskite technology yet with the clear advantage of flexibility. the interfacial engineering approach demonstrated by tan and colleagues is a significant step forward in this direction enabling flexible all-perovskite tandem cells with unparalleled efficiencies. yet, a further reduction of charge recombination within the perovskite bulk and at the interface between the perovskite and the transport layers — not only with respect to the hole transport layer as reported by tan and team, but also with respect to the electron transport layer — will allow to realize the full potential of the technology in the near future.lin, r. et al. nature 603, 73–78 (2022).article google scholar lang, f. et al. joule 4, 1054–1069 (2020).article google scholar peña-camargo, f. et al. acs energy lett. 5, 2728–2736 (2020).article google scholar meng, w. et al. joule 6, 458–475 (2022).article google scholar li, l. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01045-2 (2022).article google scholar al-ashouri, a. et al. energy environ. sci. 12, 3356–3369 (2019).article google scholar fu, f. et al. energy environ. sci. 12, 3074–3088 (2019).article google scholar le corre, v. m. et al. sol. rrl 6, 2100772 (2022).article google scholar lin, r. et al. nat. energy 4, 864–873 (2019).article google scholar khenkin, m. v. et al. nat. energy 5, 35–49 (2020).article google scholar download referencesuniversity of potsdam, potsdam-golm, germanymartin stolterfoht & felix langyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to martin stolterfoht or felix lang.the authors declare no competing interestreprints and permissionsstolterfoht, m., lang, f. all-perovskite tandems get flexible. nat energy 7, 688–689 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01087-6download citationpublished: 28 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01087-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 