in the post-genomic era, many genes and regulatory elements remain uncharacterized, including riboswitches — rna structures that control gene expression by directly binding metabolites. here, a new type of metal-responsive riboswitch that senses sodium cations expands the bacterial na+ metabolic repertoire.you have full access to this article via your institution.riboswitches are microbial rna elements that bind to small-molecule ligands, such as amino acids or enzyme cofactors, to sense changing levels of metabolites. these rna structures found in mrnas respond to binding their cognate molecule by ‘switching’ conformation to alter expression of genes in the mrna. because of their cis-acting nature, the genes regulated by riboswitches are typically related to the transport or usage of the riboswitch ligand1. so far, more than 50 distinct riboswitches have been identified2. initially, it was not anticipated that riboswitches could selectively bind cationic metals, because accurate discrimination between metals is a difficult task in general and more so for a highly anionic rna molecule3. an additional challenge for metal-sensing riboswitches is how to specifically bind a lower-abundance metal, such as mn2+ or na+, from among a sea of more abundant metals (primarily mg2+ and k+ in bacterial cells). nevertheless, several riboswitches that selectively sense divalent cations have been identified2, and now a new riboswitch class has been shown to respond to the monovalent alkali metal na+4.the ligands for many computationally predicted riboswitches remain unknown, despite considerable effort to determine the molecular signals that cause these orphan rnas to change conformation5. because ligand binding to a riboswitch affects the expression of its downstream genes, the association of a riboswitch with a gene implicates both in metabolism of the ligand. thus, orphan riboswitch ligands can be predicted based on the functions of their associated downstream genes and, conversely, genes of unknown function can be characterized on the basis of their proximity to a known riboswitch. this is important because, even in the post-genomic era, roughly two-thirds of regulatory elements and one-third of protein-coding regions across bacterial species remain, at best, poorly characterized6,7. compounding the problem of defining functionality, automated genome annotations often provide general functions without specificity of activity (for example, membrane transporter, nucleic acid binding protein). in this context, orphan riboswitches present an attractive target of investigation to identify functions of both regulatory rna elements and their downstream genes.in this issue of nature chemical biology, white et al.4 used bioinformatic analyses to generate a consensus structure for the orphan riboswitch duf1646 element from 308 sequences. after examining the riboswitch-associated downstream genes, they hypothesized that the associated ligand might be an alkali metal (fig. 1a). they used rna structural probing in the presence of various cations to detect conformational changes indicative of a riboswitch element and to identify key nucleotides involved in metal sensing (fig. 1b). further structural probing to examine the metal specificity of the response indicated that the riboswitch optimally sensed na+. the authors further used an in vitro transcriptional termination assay to show that na+, specifically among monovalent cations, allowed production of the full-length mrna. importantly, an in vivo reporter gene assay also demonstrated that na+ caused the riboswitch to activate gene expression in bacterial cells. observing the riboswitch response to na+ levels in the medium required high-ph conditions, because na+ export is used to adapt to alkaline conditions via a h+/na+ antiporter (fig. 1a). lastly, the authors investigated the coordination of two distinct signals — na+ and c-di-amp — in a tandem riboswitch controlling osmoregulation. overall, this report identified na+ as a ligand for an the duf1646 orphan riboswitch, which significantly expands the limited knowledge about sodium-responsive gene regulation.a, a predicted riboswitch, the orphan duf1646 motif, was found to be located upstream of genes encoding cation transporters, some characterized as na+/h+ antiporters. using rna structural probing, transcriptional termination assays and in vivo reporter gene expression, na+ was shown to cause structural changes in the riboswitch that resulted in full-length mrna production and gene expression. high intracellular na+ thus leads to expression of the na+/h+ antiporter, which exports na+ to drive h+ uptake and maintain intracellular ph under alkaline conditions. (to detect in vivo na+-dependent reporter gene regulation, the authors used high external ph to drive down intracellular na+.) b, high-na+ conditions cause certain nucleotide regions (red) to become more structured, indicating a likely na+-binding site. upon na+ binding, an alternative structure (p2) disrupting the terminator stem (blue) is predicted to form, allowing expression of downstream genes. p1, stem 1; p2, stem 2. c, with the identification of a ligand for the duf1646 riboswitch, downstream genes of unknown function have now been linked to na+ homeostasis. this may allow the identification of novel classes of enzymes or other proteins connected to na+ usage in bacterial cells.the identification of a new type of metal-sensing riboswitch is significant because it expands the ligand types for riboswitches to include monovalent cations2,8. the discovery of a na+-sensing riboswitch also fills a significant gap in the understanding of how the expression of na+ homeostasis genes is controlled. previously, just one na+-binding regulator was known, the nhar transcription factor, which is only known to regulate a handful of genes. additionally, the new na+-responsive riboswitch implicates further genes in na+ metabolism (fig. 1c). almost half of the na+-riboswitch associated genes reported by white et al. are of unclear function, suggesting these could be new genes involved in na+ homeostasis and usage. it would be of particular interest to find novel enzymes in pathways that respond to changing na+ levels and additional na+-sensing regulatory proteins. another third of the na+-riboswitch-associated genes encode transporters of uncertain ion specificity that are either unassigned or currently annotated as transporters for other cations. the authors speculate that those versions of the kefb and mgta genes (annotated as k+ and mg2+ transporters, respectively) encoded downstream of this riboswitch may actually serve as na+ transporters4.a key issue raised by this finding is how this riboswitch selects for na+ over other cations, especially the much more abundant k+. crystal structures and biophysical studies examining binding affinities and the coupling of conformational changes to ligand binding are needed to define the mechanisms of na+ specificity. such studies could ultimately further inform gene annotations, as well as the design of new riboswitches for use as biosensors or other applications.serganov, a. & nudler, e. cell 152, 17–24 (2013).cas article google scholar breaker, r. r. biochemistry 61, 137–149 (2022).cas article google scholar saunders, a. m. & derose, v. j. curr. opin. chem. biol. 31, 153–159 (2016).cas article google scholar white, n., sadeeshkumar, h., sun, a., sudarsan, n. & breaker, r. r. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01086-4 (2022).article pubmed google scholar sherlock, m. e. & breaker, r. r. rna 26, 675–693 (2020).cas article google scholar ireland, w. t. et al. elife 9, 55308 (2020).article google scholar ghatak, s., king, z. a., sastry, a. & palsson, b. o. nucleic acids res. 47, 2446–2454 (2019).cas article google scholar ferré-d’amaré, a. r. & winkler, w. c. met. ions life sci. 9, 141–173 (2011).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry, university of wisconsin oshkosh, oshkosh, wi, usalauren watersyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lauren waters.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionswaters, l. a new class of metal-sensing rna. nat chem biol 18, 798–799 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01087-3download citationpublished: 25 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01087-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 