longer duration of breastfeeding is shown to have long-lasting effects in rodents, which lead to an adult phenotype that is resistant to diet-induced obesity and has increased brown adipose tissue activity through a process dependent on hypothalamic fgf21 signalling.you have full access to this article via your institution.in recent years, the increasing prevalence of metabolic diseases and comorbidities has made the study of developmental biology evolve from a focus on the genetic inheritance of pathologies to the acquisition of non-genetic metabolic phenotypes at the earliest age. from this point of view, pregnancy and lactation represent the first and most critical window to determine such phenotypes, which can develop from early childhood to adulthood. thus, maternal factors contribute to the development of pathologies caused by a holistic combination of genetic and non-genetic inheritance and lifestyle.prolonged breastfeeding protects offspring from hfd-induced obesity through a mechanism dependent on increased uncoupling protein 1 (ucp1) content and thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue, as well as through fgf21 hypothalamic signalling. sns, sympathetic nervous system.previous studies on rodents and humans have determined the role of the perinatal maternal lifestyle on programming peripheral metabolic tissues to determine the incidence of metabolic disease in offspring1,2. however, the effects of maternal lifestyle on one of the main feeding and energy regulatory organs, the hypothalamus, have typically focused on impaired maternal nutrition3. instead, in the current issue of nature metabolism, pena-leon et al.4 show a protective role for prolonged lactation in rodent pups against high-fat diet (hfd)-induced obesity during adulthood via hypothalamic uptake and neural activation of enhanced hepatic fibroblast growth factor 21 (fgf21) that leads to heightened activation of brown adipose tissue (bat).since its discovery in 1942 (ref. 5), epigenetics has increasingly dominated the landscape of non-genetic metabolic programming. in recent years, the experimental conditions to exert epigenetic changes have switched from extreme to more modest challenges. hence, recent work investigating the mechanisms for the maternal-induced programming of offspring metabolism has also focused on epigenetic modifications6,7,8,9. such modifications occur in the offspring’s main metabolic organs, such as the liver, muscle, adipose tissue and the central nervous system, affecting endocrine functions that mediate inter-organ crosstalk and maintain metabolic homeostasis. interestingly, the current study is unique in demonstrating that the postnatal mother-to-infant interaction directly affects a peripheral tissue–central nervous system signalling crosstalk in the offspring that can be modified to reprogram hypothalamic signalling and confers resistance to hfd-induced obesity by enhancing bat activity. whether epigenetics of the organs involved in such cross-talk cause or contribute to this effect remains to be elucidated.a previous study10 demonstrated that after birth, feeding induces hepatic fgf21 secretion, the primary source of circulating fgf21. this feeding effect is reduced at weaning and is opposite to the main stimulatory mechanism for the production of hepatic fgf21 in adulthood — fasting. in the present work, the authors identified a role for fgf21 to induce thermogenesis in bat after birth. considering the metabolic actions of fgf21 in peripheral and central tissues11, the group led by drs. rubén nogueiras and luisa seoane compared rats weaned at three weeks (standard weaning) to those weaned at four weeks in a model of prolonged-breastfeeding or suckling. while there were no differences in whole-body composition and overall metabolism, higher bat ucp1 staining and interscapular temperature suggested higher bat activity after prolonged lactation. surprisingly, the differences in increased bat activity were stronger when weaned rats were fed a hfd for three months, determined by increased bat activity in vivo. in parallel, fat mass was reduced, energy expenditure was increased, glucose, insulin and lipid metabolism were improved, and hypothalamic leptin sensitivity was enhanced at 18 weeks of age. thus, previous work identifying the role of fgf21 to induce bat thermogenesis after birth10 and their own work revealing a role for dopamine hypothalamic signalling to control bat activity, energy expenditure and body weight12 led the authors to hypothesize a direct role of hepatic fgf21 in the hypothalamus to confer the described phenotype. using several elegant experiments based on in vivo and ex vivo viral vector gene silencing and receptor agonist stimulation, as well as in-depth metabolic techniques, the authors demonstrate that hepatic fgf21 uptake and signalling in dopamine 2 receptor (d2r)-expressing gabaergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamic area (lha) and the zona incerta (zi) area of the hypothalamus is needed to drive the described phenotype (fig. 1).the lha functions to coordinate sleep, arousal, feeding behaviour and the autonomous nervous system, while gabaergic neurons are part of the inhibitory/excitatory neural circuit by producing the inhibitory neurotransmitter gaba (gamma-aminobutyric acid). in contrast, dopamine is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and the receptor d2r controls food intake after stimulation. thus, the authors evidence a role for fgf21 to modulate the activity of neurons, integrating inhibitory/excitatory signalling within the lha, which reduces food intake and activates bat via the sympathetic nervous system. the activation of d2r-expressing gabaergic neurons also in the adjacent zi, whose functions are not fully established, supports an integrative role for the control of behaviours and physiological states.contrary to humans, the neural development of rodents occurs after birth3. however, the neural plasticity that occurs in the postnatal human brain warrants a potential effect of breast milk-induced fgf21 in humans. moreover, fatty acids stimulate hepatic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α (pparα), on which the postnatal induction of fgf21 relies, as previously described in newborns by ref. 10. recent studies have shown that human milk can modify circulating pparα in newborns13, suggesting a possibility for breast milk to induce fgf21 via pparα in human newborns. taken together, these studies open the possibility of identifying nutritional strategies for newborns to achieve the described protective metabolic effect. considering hepatic fgf21 exerts metabolically beneficial actions in many other organs11 and considering the role of the hypothalamus as one of the main metabolic regulators, the results presented herein are novel and promising.adults that maintain bat activity show lower incidence of type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia, cardiac and cardiovascular disease14. since only cold exposure has proven to increase bat activity in adult humans, the idea of lengthening the duration of breastfeeding to further stimulate bat activity during adulthood is exciting. the metabolic phenotype presented by the authors also results in browning of white adipose tissue (wat). this process is yet to be demonstrated in humans, especially since there is controversy about the clinical contribution of adipose browning to overall energy expenditure, like that of bat thermogenesis15. nevertheless, these findings shed new mechanistic insight into the long-lasting effects of breastfeeding, further supporting its protective role against metabolic disease in adulthood by promoting a healthier adipose tissue and improving body composition and metabolism.overall, this study brings forward prolonged breastfeeding as a novel mechanism for mother-to-infant metabolic programming that confers resistance to diet-induced obesity by conveying a more thermogenic bat and wat during adulthood. although the translation of the experimental approach to humans would involve larger efforts, pena-leon et al. present exciting preclinical data that will surely lead to new research in developmental biology and pave the way for clinical studies to better understand the long term metabolic benefits of breastfeeding.kusuyama, j., alves-wagner, a. b., makarewicz, n. s. & goodyear, l. j. nat. metab. 2, 858–872 (2020).article google scholar kereliuk, s. m., brawerman, g. m. & dolinsky, v. w. int. j. mol. sci. 18, 1451 (2017).article google scholar dearden, l. & ozanne, s. e. front. neuroendocrinol. 39, 3–16 (2015).article google scholar pena-león, v. et al. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00602-z (2022).article google scholar waddington, c. h. the epigenotpye. endeavour 1, 18–20 (1942). google scholar lin, x. h. et al. sci. rep. 11, 316 (2021).cas article google scholar kusuyama, j. et al. cell metab. 33, 939–956.e8 (2021).cas article google scholar han, l. et al. nat. genet. 50, 432–442 (2018).cas article google scholar gu, t. p. et al. nature 477, 606–610 (2011).cas article google scholar hondares, e. et al. cell metab. 11, 206–212 (2010).cas article google scholar flippo, k. h. & potthoff, m. j. nat. metab. 3, 309–317 (2021).cas article google scholar folgueira, c. et al. nat. metab. 1, 811–829 (2019).cas article google scholar cheshmeh, s., nachvak, s. m., rezvani, n. & saber, a. diabetes metab. syndr. obes. 13, 2227–2237 (2020).cas article google scholar becher, t. et al. nat. med. 27, 58–65 (2021).cas article google scholar carpentier, a. c. et al. front. endocrinol. 9, 447 (2018).article google scholar download referencesdorothy m. davis heart and lung research institute, the ohio state university wexner medical center, columbus, oh, usaelisa félix-soriano & kristin i. stanforddepartment of physiology and cell biology, the ohio state university college of medicine, columbus, oh, usaelisa félix-soriano & kristin i. stanforddepartment of internal medicine, the ohio state university college of medicine, columbus, oh, usakristin i. stanfordyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to kristin i. stanford.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfélix-soriano, e., stanford, k.i. prolonged lactation benefits offspring metabolism. nat metab 4, 798–799 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00604-xdownload citationpublished: 25 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00604-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 