shortly after the james webb space telescope launched into space, the ir 2022 conference convened to identify and explore synergies between ground-based and space-based infrared observations.you have full access to this article via your institution.the james webb space telescope (jwst) presents a new milestone for space observing in the infrared (ir). with its unparalleled sensitivity, 6.5-m primary mirror and advanced instrumentation tuned to various ir wavelengths, jwst will observe the first galaxies, reveal the birth of stars and planets and characterize exoplanets. however, when it comes to pushing the limits of understanding our universe at ir wavelengths, the key lies in working together with ground-based ir observatories. given limitations in costs and technology, we are still constrained in the types of observations we can do in space. therefore, if we want the best understanding of the ir universe, exploring the synergy between jwst and our observatories on the ground is crucial.this synergy was the focus of ir 2022, an international conference held in february 2022 that followed on from the ir 2020 conference held online in october 2020 (l. burtscher et al., the messenger 183, 31–36; 2021). like its predecessor, ir 2022 was held completely virtually. discussions during ir 2020 highlighted the fact that online meetings have a significantly wider reach within the community, due to factors such as reduced pressure on funds (also highlighted by m. skiles et al., nat. sustain. 5, 149–156; 2022), care and local responsibilities, and difficulties with travel. this, combined with the significant contributions to greenhouse gas emission resulting from travel to in-person conferences, and the ongoing threat of infection related to the coronavirus pandemic, the choice was made to hold ir 2022 virtually. the meeting was held over five half-days, allowing a wider range of time zones to be accommodated, balance with local commitments, and reducing ‘zoom fatigue’ from prolonged periods online. to encourage participation from all time zones, talks were recorded and shared within about 12 hours, presentations were collected through the zenodo platform to provide a legacy record of the meeting and discussions were conducted online through slack. a full spectrum of ir science cases was covered through invited and contributed talks and posters, including sessions on star and planet formation, exoplanets, photodissociation regions, transients, evolved stars, solar system objects and active galactic nuclei. in addition, the conference put a focus on so-called ‘high-5’ categories, with each pertaining to a powerful observing technique.high spectral resolution was the subject of the first high-5 category. currently provided by ground-based instruments such as crires+ (cryogenic high-resolution infrared echelle spectrograph upgrade) at the very large telescope, high spectral resolution observations were shown throughout the talks to be critical for resolving the gas kinematics in the protostellar disks forming stars and planets. during the conference, the need for a high spectral resolution (r > 50,000) ir space mission was also discussed to obtain the sensitivities required to probe these small, complex regions. one particular case that relies on the synergy between high spectral resolution observations from both ground and space, and requires the synergy the conference focussed on, is the study of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs). observable in a diversity of objects, from active galactic nuclei to individual star-forming regions, these molecules are key to tracing physical and chemical processes across the universe. while jwst can cover a wide wavelength range, probe fine physical substructures at medium resolution and determine the composition of dust in addition to probing molecules such as pahs, ground-based spectroscopic measurements provide much higher resolution, both angular (39 m for the upcoming extremely large telescope (elt) versus the 6.5 m of jwst) and spectral (for example, r = 100,000 with the metis instrument on elt versus a maximum of 3,500 for miri-mrs on jwst). also, ground-based observations allow us to use the latest technology comparatively cheaply.the second high-5 category, high spatial resolution, also presented its merit across a variety of science topics. interferometry in particular has shed light on a variety of structures, from the dusty structures of active galactic nuclei to asymptotic giant branch star circumbinary disks, the disks of massive forming stars, and the dusty shells created by evolved stars. here, the very large telescope interferometer (vlti) proves unmatched in providing thermal ir interferometric data with the matisse instrument. the spatial resolution interferometers provide (as low as milliarcsecond scales) is untouchable by current space missions. opportunities for synergy to exploit jwst’s sensitivity and the milliarcsecond resolution achievable by vlti will therefore be invaluable in guiding ground-based observations.the third high-5 category concerned high-contrast observations. throughout the meeting it became evident that the mid-ir provides a great opportunity to characterize exoplanets with both jwst (direct imaging) and ground-based facilities, especially the large binocular telescope interferometer (lbti) as it provides contrasts of many magnitudes, the multiple mirror telescope (mmt), and upcoming ~30 m telescopes (for example, the elt). within the science discussion concerning exoplanets, the future merit of upgrades to the vlti were also highlighted, with gravity+ also pushing to extremely low near-ir magnitudes (k ~ 22 mag) and the planned ‘hi-5’ visiting instrument exploiting the contrast differences achievable in the l-band to assist in exoplanet detection and characterization.how to overcome the ‘high background’ associated with ground-based thermal ir observations was the focus of the fourth high-5 category. the upcoming university of tokyo atacama observatory (being built at an altitude of ~5,500 m to help improve atmospheric transmission, especially in the q band at ~20 μm) was the focus of a number of talks, which discussed techniques such as cold chopping, field stacking, on-board calibrations and drift scanning — proposed to help minimize the background that limits ground-based ir observing. for solar system science, maintaining access to and improving ground-based instrumentation, despite the advent of the jwst, is key. this was demonstrated in talks covering the detection of near-earth and solar system objects, which require the schedule flexibility and long-term facility access afforded by ground-based observatories.the final high-5 focus of the conference concerned high time resolution. these observations are crucial in measuring time-sensitive phenomena, such as transient events. one particularly interesting result relating to this came from daisuke taniguchi and collaborators, who were able to make use of a weather satellite to monitor betelgeuse with no interruption over a five-year period and capture the entirety of its transient great dimming (d. taniguchi et al., nat. astron. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41550-022-01680-5; 2022). other subjects that require high time resolution observations include red novae, nuclear and neutrino transients and capturing heavy element synthesis from such events. these studies are all enabled through thermal ir observations, further demonstrating the need for ground-based thermal ir instrumentation in the jwst era.the conference also dedicated time to discuss the future of ir astronomy. one important aspect of this was the diversity discussion, as the ir community (like all of astronomy and most stem fields) is still lacking in this respect. during this diversity discussion, it was noted that certain sub-groups (for example, thermal ir instrumentation) were less diverse than others, and that proactive changes are required across career levels to improve this (for example, improving workplace environments for those from marginalized groups), with an emphasis that change must come not only from individuals but from institutions (for example, through mandatory sensitivity training and diverse hiring practices). resources need to be used to ensure that proper support for researchers and students is in place so that all astrophysicists can have an equally positive experience within their institutions, regardless of their background.networking and informal interactions are an important component of conferences. traditionally, this has been a challenge for online meetings, as neither zoom nor slack (two popular software tools) provide an environment similar to in-person interaction. ir 2022 therefore scheduled additional sessions each day either side of the scheduled talks that used cross-platform software including the desktop-based gather and altspacevr (which can be accessed either on a computer or through a virtual-reality headset). the altspacevr sessions were developed in collaboration with members of the future of meetings (tfom) community (see v. a. moss et al., nat. astron. 5, 213–216; 2021), who have been advocating for and directly supporting improved virtual interaction in academia and beyond. both platforms use avatars to create a virtual presence and give users spatial autonomy in a virtual space, allowing multiple, overlapping conversations that can be joined organically due to a natural sound drop-off from your avatar location. to encourage attendees to join the virtual reality sessions, an additional talk on how virtual reality can be used in research, education and outreach was hosted in altspacevr (a snapshot of which is shown in fig. 1), and the conference additionally used funds to subsidize the purchase of five headsets for attendees who applied for accessibility grants. further outreach activities were also carried out, with nine ir 2022 attendees giving outreach talks on infrared astronomy in eight different languages and time zones with support from haus der astronomie in heidelberg, allowing the science being done in the ir to be shared with an international, general audience. in tandem, there was regular reporting from our twitter account @ir2022meeting, which reached 227,000 impressions in the three-month window around the conference.avatars represent participants who can interact audibly, visually, textually and with emoticons.now, in the months following the meeting, jwst has reached its final location, initial mirror alignment has been achieved and the first test data from each instrument has been shared with the world. discussions at ir 2022 provided a large range of new scientific ideas for the telescope and synergy projects between the jwst and ground-based observatories, while also highlighting that observing from the ground will always play a crucial role in our understanding of the ir universe. ir 2024, preliminarily discussed to be a us-hosted hybrid or online meeting, will occur when jwst will be fully operational, allowing discussions of how the synergy discussed at ir 2022 is helping us learn about the ir universe.the organizers would like to thank the tfom network for their tremendous help with setting up a virtual reality component for this conference, as well as c. liefke and m. pössel from haus der astronomie for their support with the public outreach talks.institute of astronomy, ku leuven, leuven, belgiumabigail j. frostinstitute of space and astronautical science, japan aerospace exploration agency, sagamihara city, japanryan m. lau & elizabeth j. taskerleiden observatory, leiden university, leiden, the netherlandsleonard burtscherdepartment of physics & astronomy, university of texas at san antonio, san antonio, tx, usachris packhamnational astronomical observatory of japan, mitaka, tokyo, japanchris packhambebr, groningen, the netherlandsglen a. reescsiro space & astronomy, australia telescope national facility, epping, new south wales, australiavanessa a. mossanu supercomputer facility, australian national university, acton, australian capital territory, australiarika kobayashiyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to abigail j. frost.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfrost, a.j., lau, r.m., burtscher, l. et al. ir 2022: an infrared-bright future for ground-based ir observatories in the era of jwst. nat astron 6, 772–773 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01733-9download citationpublished: 18 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01733-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 