a unified theory of particle transport by wind can explain the observations of aeolian features, like dunes, across the solar system rocky bodies with atmospheres.you have full access to this article via your institution.aeolian bedforms that formed by the action of wind on loose granular material, of which dunes are the most familiar example, are common in the solar system. they can be found in arid regions on earth, on the surface of mars and venus, pluto and even on large moons of the giant planets like titan, io and triton1. the study of the aeolian activity of these solar system bodies is fundamental to the understanding of their geology and past and present climate. writing in nature astronomy, andrew gunn and douglas jerolmack developed a model for the predictions of the threshold velocities needed for aeolian transport under the different physical conditions of the bodies in the solar system2.there is no better illustration of the similarities between wind-sculpted landscapes in the solar system than mars. images taken by orbiters have revealed very earth-like aeolian bedforms from small-scale ripples to large-scale dunes, draas (small dunes over large ones) and dune fields (fig. 1). in the cold and arid environment of mars, aeolian processes are widespread and thus are key for understanding its past and present climate. detailed analysis also revealed puzzling differences compared to earth that raise new scientific questions. for example, the regular ripples on mars are 1–3 metres large and are superimposed with smaller decimetre-scale ripples, with no terrestrial analogue. similarly, transverse aeolian ridges (tars) are an aeolian feature with sizes in between ripples and dunes (on the order of 10–100 m) without a clear terrestrial counterpart. there is currently an active debate on how to classify these features and on what they could be related to3,4,5. in a recent work done in the low-pressure wind tunnel at aarhus university in denmark with 125 μm sand grains6, it was found that threshold shear stress — the stress necessary to mobilize granular material by the wind — is significantly less than the one predicted by the theory for low-pressure environments like mars. the same behaviour was found recently for 90 μm glass beads by a series of experiments in the same wind tunnel7. such unexplained threshold velocities and aeolian patterns, together with the occurrence of large dust storms and dust devils in such a low-density atmosphere, indicate that our knowledge of sand transport on the red planet is not yet complete. understanding the mechanisms underlying these phenomena is critical for the safe operation of instruments on mars and, in the far future, for human safety and health.nasa/jpl-caltech/msss (a); photo, hezi yizhaq (b); nasa/jpl/university of arizona (c) imagery courtesy of google earth, copyright maxar technologies (d).a, multi-scale ripples on mars as imaged by the nasa msl curiosity rover in gale crater. sands of forvie ripple field. the wavelength of the large ripples is about 1.8 m with small impact ripples between them. the picture shows the amazing complexity of the pattern with multiscale ripples, due to multidirectional wind and different formative mechanisms. the formation of the large martian ripples is still in debate and not fully understood. mahli camera mosaics, sol 2991. b, megaripples and small impact ripples near torra bay, namibia. the length of the scale bar is 0.5 m. the crests are covered by coarse grains with a mean diameter of 1 mm. c, fingering linear dunes braking in chains of barchans in the hellaspontus region (mars). the fingering dunes develop on non-erodible ground with a localized source of sand. the formative winds blow from left to right. hirise orbit psp_007676_1385, grayscale (red band) and colour (irb) images. d, fingering linear dunes in the sahara desert, chad, 19.27° e, 19.11° n. note the barchans develop the end of the bottom linear dune.large linear dunes hundreds of kilometres long with heights than can exceed 100 m in some places8 were also observed on saturn’s largest moon titan near the equator and one of the main open questions is what that ‘sand’ is made of. the hundred micron-sized grains are probably organic, made of tholins precipitated form the atmosphere, water ice, or a combination of the two. the discovery of titan’s dunes and its dust cycle by the cassini–huygens mission was unexpected because the wind speeds predicted by global circulation models were too low to mobilize organic sand and dust. recently, it was suggested by a new model that due to the strong cohesive force between the tholin particles, the fluid threshold is higher than thought before but the impact threshold — the wind speed needed for sustained saltation via the granular splash mechanism — is lower than was predicted before8,9. this hysteresis behaviour that was also suggested to explain the sand transport on mars predicts a large sand flux under the prevailing weak winds and that titan’s large dunes can be formed by fine grains of the order of 100 μm.the dunes discovered on pluto, made of granular methane ice10, raise more questions about how these ice particles move in the low atmospheric pressure of pluto, which is a factor of 100,000 times lower than the earth’s.in order to solve these puzzles, we need to know the threshold velocities necessary to mobilize (fluid threshold) and sustain (impact threshold) the movement of grains of different sizes and composition under the different physical conditions of the solar system bodies. gunn and jerolmack used new physics ingredients in the calculations of the threshold velocities, such as taking into account the adhesion force between the particles and new parametrizations of the lift and the drag forces. improved calculations of the impact threshold, which enables sand transport due to the impact of saltating grains (those particles that move in successive ballistic trajectories) and not by the direct action of the wind, includes new contributions from particle elasticity, granular friction and viscous dissipation. these improvements allow the authors to calculate the fluid and the impact thresholds for six aeolian bodies of the solar system for all the relevant minerals as a function of grain diameter. their model was also used to predict the attrition parameter for characteristic particles at the impact threshold, which is important to understand dust emission by the bombardment of saltating grains. the larger the attrition parameter the stronger is the wearing process. the results are in good agreement with observations and wind tunnel experiments and thus will be a fundamental tool for planetary scientists.because our current knowledge of aeolian processes is based on what we observe and know at earth’s atmospheric conditions, the discoveries of aeolian patterns in other worlds have opened new questions in our understanding of the physics of sand transport and called into question our understanding on how the wind is sculpting and shaping the landscape even on our earth. the new planned missions to the solar system bodies, like exomars to mars, dragonfly to titan and veritas and envison to venus, will help to answer those questions.silvestro, s. & titus, t. n. j. geophys. res. planets 127, e2022je007198 (2022).ads article google scholar gunn, a. & jerolmack, d. j. nat. astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01669-0 (2022).article google scholar sullivan, r. et al. j. geophys. res. planets 125, 1–39 (2020).article google scholar lapôtre, m. g. a. et al. j. geophys. res. planets 126, e2020je006729 (2021).ads article google scholar gough, t. r. et al. j. geophys. res. planets 126, e2021je007011 (2021).ads article google scholar andreotti, b. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 118, e2012386118 (2021).article google scholar understanding large aeolian ripples on mars through wind tunnel experiments 20-epn-054 (europlanet society, 2022); https://www.europlanet-society.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/d1.2_ta_outcome_epn_2024_ri_final.pdflorenz, r. d. j. geophys. res. planets 49, e2022gl098375 (2022).comola, f. et al. j. geophys. res. planets 49, e2021gl097605 (2022).telfer, m. w. et al. science 360, 992–997 (2018).ads article google scholar download referencesdepartment of solar energy and environmental physics, blaustein institutes for desert research, ben-gurion university of the negev, beersheba, israelhezi yizhaqistituto nazionale di astrofisica, osservatorio di capodimonte, napoli, italysimone silvestrocarl sagan center, seti institute, mountain view, ca, usasimone silvestroyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to hezi yizhaq.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsyizhaq, h., silvestro, s. the aeolian solar system. nat astron 6, 883–884 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01744-6download citationpublished: 22 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01744-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 