the un sustainable development goal 7 (sdg 7) on energy access and goal 5 (sdg 5) on gender equality are inextricably linked. a new study utilizing field-based data from india unpacks how levels of women’s empowerment in households influences their awareness, usage, satisfaction, and preference for energy services.you have full access to this article via your institution.since 2000, india has made significant strides in providing poor households with access to clean energy. around 97% of households in india have grid-based electricity connections, primarily due to the flagship saubhagya scheme of the indian government1. similarly, more than 95% of households have an lpg connection for cleaner cooking due to the large-scale implementation of the pmuy scheme2. access to clean energy unburdens women from time‐consuming fuelwood collection activities, provides more time for economically productive work and ensures relatively better health benefits. the transition to income‐generating market participation is a critical component of women’s empowerment and a central justification for universal energy access. evidence shows that improved energy access reduces gender-based economic disparities and acts as a lever for women’s empowerment3,4.despite ensuring a near-ubiquitous supply of energy services for cooking and lighting, sustained use of these services by poor households, and particularly among women, has been a perennial challenge in india. thus, a key question arises: does the level of women’s empowerment influence the use of energy services in poor households of india? this question is now systematically analyzed in nature energy by alice tianbo zhang and colleagues in the usa and india5.the research team explore the effect of gender inequality in households on four dimensions of energy services: awareness, satisfaction, usage, and preference/opinion. the researchers adapted established instruments developed by un women, unicef, and weai6,7,8 for measuring gender equality, and constructed a women’s empowerment index (wei) based on the six dimensions of knowledge, social norm, work, time, money, and power. their wei was the primary predictor in this study. each household was ranked as low, medium, or high empowerment based on the responses on the six dimensions of knowledge.zhang and colleagues then conducted a field survey of 2,312 households across six indian states: bihar, chhattisgarh, jharkhand, madhya pradesh, rajasthan, and uttar pradesh. to explore the gender inequality within the households, data was collected from both the primary cook (women) and her spouse in each household, making a total sample size of 4,624 respondents. analyses of this dyad (women and men) in each household helped explore within-household variations in gender-based empowerment. this offers a substantial improvement in the approach relative to similar studies drawing comparisons between women and men across households (see, for example, ref. 9).the study provides a few notable findings. for one, significant gender disparity is identified across all the four dimensions of the energy services awareness, satisfaction, usage, and preference/opinion. women in low-empowered households use relatively lower levels of electricity and also demonstrate overall low awareness of clean energy services when compared to their male partners and also when compared to women in high empowered households.meanwhile, women with higher empowerment levels have lower satisfaction with energy services (community lighting, home electricity, primary fuel, and lpg access) than the women with lower empowerment levels. this indicates that as the bargaining capacity of women improves, they have higher expectations for the household and community level energy scenario.the researchers also find variations in the association of preference/opinion on energy services with empowerment levels. low empowered women have a relatively lower preference for lpg subsidy than their male partners, indicating that these households place low opportunity costs on biomass collection for traditional stove use. low empowered women put the least emphasis on subsidies for solar home systems compared to their male partners, demonstrating a lack of adequate awareness of energy services.the results on perceptions of traditional stove use should also be underscored. women in low empowered households are less concerned and are less likely to believe that household air pollution is pernicious to their health. the study thus corroborates prior research findings that low educational attainment and low empowerment levels among women reduce awareness of household air pollution and its health effects.zhang and colleagues’ study has crucial implications for practice and policy for low-income populations in india and energy-poor communities elsewhere. uptake and use of energy services are a function of gender-based empowerment. low empowerment among women could be a barrier to sustained adoption of household energy services, which could exacerbate gender inequality in households. realizing the un sdg 7 on energy access is therefore difficult without adequate attention to sdg 5 on gender equality. targeted awareness campaigns that address household-level gender disparity could increase the utilization of energy services among women.women’s empowerment is multidimensional, and there is no one-size-fits-all solution to address gender disparity. policy measures that address gender inequality in low-income settings must utilize a gender-lens approach from project ideation to implementation and evaluation. this is especially incumbent in topical areas of energy access, where gender-based perspectives have received little attention.zhang and colleagues’ findings could be useful for future research on the interface of women’s empowerment and energy access. several key questions deserve further systematic attention. for example, it is important to understand what the gendered constraints are that prevent the realization of energy equity in households. additionally, could we leverage women’s social networks in rural poor communities to develop a targeted awareness campaign to improve women’s bargaining capacity for higher energy usage10,11? finally, it’s critical to identify the barriers and enablers to include women as an integral part of the energy access value chain. while gender equality is a crucial standalone goal to realize, it is also an important pathway toward achieving energy access for all.agrawal, s. et al. state of electricity access in india: insights from the india residential energy survey (ires) 2020 (ceew, 2020); https://www.ceew.in/sites/default/files/ceew-research-on-state-of-electricty-access-and-coverage-in-india.pdfmani, s. et al. nat. energy 5, 450–457 (2020).mathscinet article google scholar maji, p., mehrabi, z. & kandlikar, m. world dev. 139, 105309 (2021).article google scholar sedai, a. k., vasudevan, r., pena, a. a. & miller, r. j. econ. behav. organ. 185, 580–601 (2021).article google scholar zhang, a. t. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01044-3 (2022).article google scholar alkire, s. et al. world dev. 52, 71–91 (2013).article google scholar women’s empowerment index (un women, 2020); https://data.unwomen.org/publications/womens-empowerment-indexmalapit, h. et al. world dev. 122, 675–692 (2019).article google scholar subramaniam, r. oxf. econ. pap. 48, 280–299 (1996).article google scholar kumar, p. & igdalsky, l. energy res. soc. sci. 48, 189–193 (2019).article google scholar kumar, p. et al. environ. res. lett. 16, 064087 (2021).article google scholar download referencesboston college school of social work, chestnut hill, ma, usapraveen kumaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to praveen kumar.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionskumar, p. energy access and women's empowerment. nat energy 7, 684–685 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01080-zdownload citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01080-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 