individual fullerenes containing switchable electric dipoles have been demonstrated to function as single-molecule memory and logic at room temperature.you have full access to this article via your institution.the computers we use today have logic and memory based on field-effect transistors, three-terminal devices in which a voltage applied to a gate electrode modulates the current flow between source and drain electrodes. with the drive towards continued miniaturization and an eye on alternative computing architectures, in recent years there has been a push towards two-terminal devices that, when configured appropriately, can play the role of both logic and memory1. these are sometimes called ‘memristors’, a term that refers to a device with an electrical conductance that depends on the prior current and voltage history of the system2. ideally, such a device could be toggled many times between ‘on’ and ‘off’ states of high and low conduction using voltage pulses, but would otherwise remain in a fixed state when interrogated with a small current. many materials systems are capable of resistive switching3 of this kind through a variety of mechanisms, but scaling to the smallest size limits while preserving stability and reproducibility remains a persistent challenge.as they report in nature materials, li and colleagues have demonstrated an approach that could push towards the ultimate size scaling for resistive switching-based logic and memory4. using a scanning tunnelling microscope (stm)-style break junction approach5, li and colleagues have created and studied reproducible single-molecule junctions containing individual metallofullerenes (sc2c2@cs(hept)-c88), where a [sc2c2] group is enclosed within a fullerene cage. the orientation of that group determines the electric dipole moment of the molecule and, as argued in the paper, may be switched controllably between two configurations through applied voltage pulses. the internal state of the molecule can be detected through changes in the two-terminal electronic conductance, g, of the junction.characterization of single-molecule junctions is notoriously challenging, as atomic-scale variation in electrode configuration and molecular position can strongly influence the conductance. the exponential decay with distance of localized orbitals and alterations in molecule/metal charge transfer and level alignment all contribute to measured conductance. histograms over many junction configurations obtained through repeated junction formation/rupture reveal statistically preferred arrangements. here, the stm system has sufficient spatial stability for extended (on the time scale of seconds) characterization of individual junctions, allowing the collection of hysteretic i–v traces that demonstrate the bistability as well as repeatable measurements of g through applied voltage pulse sequences. the two voltage-cycled configurations have conductances that differ by 150–500%, depending on the particular junction. control experiments involving other molecules show neither the hysteretic i–v nor bistability under voltage pulsing. compared with previous efforts looking at conductance switching6,7, including other fullerene cage molecules8,9, this work is remarkable for showing such bistability at room temperature.an essential point, supporting the picture that the [sc2c2] dipole plays the key role, is that voltage pulses (and hence electric field in the junction) of opposite polarity are required to toggle the molecule back and forth between the preferred configurations. this allows the authors to treat a junction like a two-terminal logic device, considering the voltage bias applied to the tip and the substrate as inputs. when interpreted this way, the authors have demonstrated logic operations using a single switchable molecule at room temperature (fig. 1).li and colleagues4 have made single-molecule non-volatile switches based on sc2c2@cs(hept)-c88, a [sc2c2] group with an electric dipole moment enclosed in a fullerene cage. conductance depends on the (voltage-switchable) dipole orientation and is bistable at room temperature. treating the two contacts as inputs, the junction may be treated as a logic element as well as a switch. i, current; v, voltage; p, electric dipole moment. figure adapted with permission from ref. 4, springer nature ltd.other methods have been demonstrated that show voltage-driven resistive switching with critical dimensions approaching the atomic scale, such as electrochemically driven motion of metal ions10. ferroelectric tunnel junctions11, with bias-switchable dipole orientations that can affect conductance, are similar in spirit and could exhibit similar physics when engineered to the ultimate size limit. the present approach, employing a molecule designed with a reorientable electric dipole explicitly to have voltage-driven bistability under ambient temperature, is an important step forward. the fullerene cage provides a comparatively shielded, made-to-order reproducible environment for the dipolar group. in contrast, ultrascaled ferroelectric materials are vulnerable to disorder in local strain and stoichiometry.actual applications of single molecules as critical active elements in technologies at this scale remain distant, however. future challenges include the development of commercially viable fabrication methods and molecular functionalities to meet the requirement for atomic-scale precision in electronics. while nanofabrication techniques have advanced, the scalable fabrication of well-defined electrodes spaced by sub-nanometre gaps through top-down means has not yet been realized, even as industry likes to talk about ‘the 2 nm node’ in semiconductor process development. moreover, single-molecule junctions based on metal electrodes come with stability concerns thanks to unintended atomic migration of the electrodes. very large current densities and local electric fields are present when around one volt is applied across a single nanometre and tens to hundreds of nanoamps flow through a single molecule. the use of covalently bound electrode materials such as graphene and the introduction of anchor groups through molecular design could be beneficial to improve stability of these devices, but these would require major steps beyond conventional silicon microelectronics processing.energy dissipation is another concern, as is the precise mechanism whereby the voltage pulses switch the configuration of the [sc2c2] group. it is not clear whether the switching is driven by direct interaction of the electric dipole with the applied electric field, or whether inelastic electronic processes are at work. in either case, while single-molecule switches can be operated at nanowatt power levels, inelastic processes lead to local heating. even with a comparatively low energy dissipated per junction, large-scale integration of molecular devices could lead to substantial heating. that being said, the demonstration here may well inspire alternative implementations involving engineered nanostructures that could have analogous functionality and be better suited to mass fabrication. molecular-scale, voltage-driven, non-volatile conductance switching may well have a future in ultra-scaled memory and logic applications once the issues of stability, reliability, reproducibility and mass fabrication have been addressed.ielmini, d. & wong, h. s. p. nat. electron. 1, 333–343 (2018).article google scholar yang, j. j., strukov, d. b. & stewart, d. r. nat. nanotechnol. 8, 13–24 (2013).cas article google scholar wang, z. et al. nat. rev. mater. 5, 173–195 (2020).cas article google scholar li, j. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01309-y (2022).article google scholar hybertsen, m. s. & venkataraman, l. acc. chem. res. 49, 452–460 (2016).cas article google scholar keane, z. k., ciszek, j. w., tour, j. m. & natelson, d. nano lett. 6, 1518–1521 (2006).cas article google scholar danilov, a. v., kubatkin, s. e., kafanov, s. g., flensberg, k. & bjørnholm, t. nano lett. 6, 2184–2190 (2006).cas article google scholar yasutake, y., shi, z., okazaki, t., shinohara, h. & majima, y. nano lett. 5, 1057–1060 (2005).cas article google scholar okamura, n., yoshida, k., sakata, s. & hirakawa, k. appl. phys. lett. 106, 043108 (2015).article google scholar terabe, k., hasegawa, t., nakayama, t. & aono, m. nature 433, 47–50 (2005).cas article google scholar garcia, v. & bibes, m. nat. commun. 5, 4289 (2014).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of physics and astronomy, rice university, houston, tx, usadouglas natelsonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to douglas natelson.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsnatelson, d. intra-molecular switching for memory and logic. nat. mater. 21, 839–840 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01310-5download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01310-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 