colloidal random lasers are hard to design and control. combining optically controlled micro-heaters with thermophilic particles attracted by them leads to microlasers with programmable and reversible patterns.you have full access to this article via your institution.when visible light meets microscale objects, the possibilities seem endless. light can control microparticles and microstructures can shape light, leading to a wide range of practical applications as well as interesting physics.now, writing in nature physics, manish trivedi and collaborators1 report that they have used optical manipulation of colloids to implement thermo-responsive miniaturized lasers with programmable activity. their research is a demonstration of the fascinating self-induced effects characteristic of light–matter interaction.colloids are the building blocks of many materials we use in everyday life. food, tissues, paints and cosmetics are made of colloidal particles, which are natural assemblies of molecules with specific physicochemical properties.in nature, such properties are the result of optimization and adaption, but they can also form synthetically — with widespread applications.the complex molecular composition of colloids makes them highly responsive to external stimuli. magnetic, electrical, optical, mechanical and flow forces interact with colloids on the nanoscale and the microscale, leading to unexpected results and applications. micromotors and active matter are excellent and modern examples. in recent decades, colloids with adaptable shape and functionalities have been proposed as active components in miniaturized and on-chip photonic devices2.random lasers are one of the best-known examples of photonics in colloidal disordered systems. they are coherent light emitters made of optically active colloids whose assembly is used to entrap light. colloids can be fabricated and obtained in a wide range of sizes, shapes and refractive indices. owing to this variability, the right choice of colloids can scatter incident light as desired. to achieve random lasing, light is multiply scattered and confined inside the colloidal aggregates that behave as efficient resonators for controllable stimulated emission3. many efforts have been devoted to design random lasers with controllable outputs by using sophisticated fabrication processes to assemble particles and lithographic techniques to properly structure the materials.trivedi and colleagues1 have now made an important step towards a random laser with all-optically programmable activity. they used janus particles of 4 μm radius as microscale heaters that are switched on at 78 °c once illuminated by an external laser. janus particles are a kind of colloid whose surfaces have two distinct physical properties. light absorption and the resulting heat generation is one of the many unique properties related to their asymmetric structure and functionalization4.in their experiments1, trivedi and colleagues showed that these heat reservoirs attract titanium dioxide particles of 1 μm radius owing to the soret effect — a thermophoretic effect where different types of particle respond differently to a temperature gradient. unlike atoms and simple molecules, colloids can be both attracted and repelled by heat depending on their surface chemistry and the interaction with the surrounding solvent5. trivedi at al. used a type of titanium dioxide that is thermophilic. using imaging, spectroscopy and appropriate theoretical analysis, they provided unambiguous evidence of the thermophoretic self-assembly and its reversibility once the janus heater was switched off.the random laser consisted of titanium dioxide particles dispersed in a liquid gain medium pumped with an external pulsed laser. the gain was then amplified and stimulated emission occurred once the titanium dioxide particles, attracted by the induced heat, assembled around the hot janus colloids (fig. 1, left). in this way, the scattering of incident light in the aggregates increased, ultimately activating the random laser. when the janus heaters were off, the titanium dioxide particles disassembled and the laser action stopped (fig. 1b, right).left: a large janus colloid is heated by incident laser light, which causes titanium dioxide microparticles (white) to aggregate around the hot janus colloid and form an optical cavity. the particles are dispersed in a gain solution (pink background), leading to random lasing emission. right: without the external laser, the janus colloid cools down and the titanium dioxide particles disperse again, and no random laser emerges.in addition, trivedi and colleagues used patterns of janus particles with a distance of about 60 μm to illustrate that they could switch laser activity between two adjacent hotspots on a timescale of a few minutes. one could imagine that this advanced strategy may lead to flexible displays made of pixels of coherent light with programmable configuration and colours. moreover, the team showed that multiple, precisely placed hot janus spheres create lasers with different shapes and spatial extensions, and their cooperative action boosted the lasers’ action. indeed, by changing the amount of janus heaters, the random laser was able to cross its energetic threshold — importantly, in a reversible way.this is not the first time the soret effect has been used in optics. it was previously used for thermal lensing and controllable light absorbers6,7 by simply focussing a laser beam inside suitable colloidal dispersions and generating a thermal gradient due to light absorption. if only the solvent is able to absorb light and increases its temperature, defocussing and focussing lensing emerge from the induced motion of the colloids towards and away from light and the resulting local change of the refractive index. if only the colloids absorb light, they move towards the laser beam augmenting the local absorption or they escape from the beam and increase the transmission7.in contrast, trivedi and co-workers1 have now shown laser activity triggered by the soret effect. although random laser inhibition by thermophoresis of graphene oxide flakes has already been reported8, thermally programmable random lasers are a new result with promising future applications in biomedical imaging and sensing, display technology and integrated photonic devices.similarly, temperature-tunable random lasers were realized many years ago in liquid crystals9. the laser activity was controlled by resorting to the nematic transition induced by light and the entire macroscopic system was a laser. but trivedi and colleagues1 have gone one step further and achieved laser reconfigurability with fine spatial control by employing tiny controllable hotspots.trivedi, m., saxena, d., ng, w. k., sapienza, r. & volpe, g. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01656-2 (2022).article google scholar wiersma, d. nat. photon. 7, 188–196 (2013).article ads google scholar wiersma, d. s. nat. phys. 4, 359–367 (2008).article google scholar jiang, s. & granick, s. langmuir 24, 2438–2445 (2008).article google scholar duhr, s. & braun, d. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 103, 19678–19682 (2006).article ads google scholar rusconi, r., isa, l. & piazza, r. j. opt. soc. am. b 21, 605–616 (2004).article ads google scholar ghofraniha, n., conti, c. & ruocco, g. phys. rev. b 75, 224203 (2007).article ads google scholar prizia, r., conti, c. & ghofraniha, n. j. opt. soc. am. b 36, 19–25 (2019).article ads google scholar wiersma, d. & cavalieri, s. nature 414, 708–709 (2001).article ads google scholar download referencesinstitute of complex systems, national council of research, rome, italyneda ghofranihayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to neda ghofraniha.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsghofraniha, n. thermally reconfigurable random lasers. nat. phys. 18, 860–861 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01665-1download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01665-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 