exploiting a plasmonic resonance, near-perfect grating structures have been reported, with a regularity that exceeds typical commercially available diffraction gratings.diffraction gratings led the path towards high-resolution spectroscopy in the early 20th century, providing vital experimental information that strongly contributed to our current understanding, for example, of atomic spectra or the expanding universe. as early as 1900, albert michelson understood the need for reliably manufacturing large gratings in order to obtain resolving powers of 500,000 or more1. he originally considered a period of 5 years sufficient to build a ruling engine that would allow about 10 inches of travel1,2. the mechanical key component in such a ruling engine is the lead screw; and this component turned out to be much more problematic than originally anticipated, that is, ruling groove after groove, the lead screw needs to ensure that deviations from the perfect periodicity remain within one tenth of the grating period. such accuracy was at least an order of magnitude beyond typical capabilities of the time. frustrated by the slow progress of his assistants, michelson eventually decided to take things into his own hands. during an absence of his assistants, he finished the remaining section of the lead screw himself1. unfortunately, this sudden haste spoiled the final 2 inches of his ruling engine. this issue would only be fixed more than 20 years after michelson’s death, introducing a feedback mechanism that, quite ironically, relied on an interferometer. nevertheless, the ruling engine was still good enough to produce an 8-inch grating, which he would proudly take with him to his nobel laureate ceremony in stockholm in 1907, however, only to get accidentally dropped, destroying any evidence for its projected resolving power2.switching from early tragedy to modern times, high-resolution spectroscopy has advanced to comb-based methods, often making the use of gratings obsolete. nevertheless, there is still considerable interest in large-area gratings, which is mostly motivated by chirped-pulse amplification schemes currently progressing towards the generation of tens of petawatts of peak power;3 and suitable compression gratings are still limited to meter size dimensions. the work of geng et al. now offers an interesting new path towards fabrication of the perfect grating4. rather than externally controlling mechanical ruling, the authors effectively rely on a plasmonic standard, that is, exploiting ablation/oxidation cycles in a metal coated substrate, they exploit a sharp resonance of surface-plasmon polaritons that leads to reproducible formation of a grating structure with well-controlled ~900 nm spacing. in the laser materials community, this mechanism of grating formation is known as laser-induced periodic surface structures5 (lipss), which, however, are infamously known for their irregularity and would not satisfy even the lowest standards for spectroscopic gratings. analyzing the regularity of geng et al.’s grating structures4 and comparing with published examples in the literature1,6,7,8, one observes that the grating period varies only by 1.5% in a grating produced with 0.2 mm/s writing speed, see fig. 1. at 100 times larger speeds, the irregularity increases to 4%, which is still in the acceptable range for commercial ruled gratings1.a 3d visualization of a small-scale cut out of fig. 2a of ref. 3. b extracting the grating phase from this figure via the hilbert transform8, one can evaluate deviations from perfections, which is shown in terms of relative probabilities vs. deviation in units grating period (red symbols). for comparison, the identical analysis was run for two commercial replicated ruled gratings (black6, blue7). parabolic fits (curves) indicate the prevalent character of short-term noise excursions; deviations from these fits are indicative of slower drift-like deviations from the desired grating periodwhile it certainly remains to be seen whether plasmonic standards can really out-compete interferometric ones and whether this approach proves scalable toward meter sizes, the approach of weng et al. opens a new avenue for manufacturing diffraction gratings with surprisingly good precision. let’s stay optimistic like michelson did and be confident that we will see such progress in a few years to come.loewen, e. g. & popov, e. diffraction gratings and applications (boca raton: crc press, 1997).harrison, g. r. the challenge of the ruled grating. phys. today 3, 6–12 (1950).article google scholar danson, c. n. et al. petawatt and exawatt class lasers worldwide. high. power laser sci. eng. 7, e54 (2019).article google scholar geng, j. et al. surface plasmons interference nanogratings: wafer-scale laser direct structuring in seconds. light sci. appl. 11, 189 (2022).ads article google scholar bonse, j. & gräf, s. maxwell meets marangoni—a review of theories on laser-induced periodic surface structures. laser photonics rev. 14, 2000215 (2020).ads article google scholar bonod, n. & neauport, j. diffraction gratings: from principles to applications in high-intensity lasers. adv. opt. photonics 8, 156–199 (2018).ads article google scholar chuang, w. c., ho, c. t. & wang, w. c. fabrication of a high-resolution periodical structure using a replication process. opt. express 13, 6685–6692 (2005).ads article google scholar takeda, m., ina, h. & kobayashi, s. fourier-transform method of fringe-pattern analysis for computer-based topography and interferometry. j. optical soc. am. 72, 156–160 (1982).ads article google scholar download referencesmax born institute for nonlinear optics and short pulse spectroscopy, berlin, germanygünter steinmeyerinstitute of physics, humboldt university, berlin, germanygünter steinmeyeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to günter steinmeyer.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons license, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s creative commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article’s creative commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.reprints and permissionssteinmeyer, g. creating the perfect plasmonic wave. light sci appl 11, 229 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-022-00926-1download citationpublished: 22 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-022-00926-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 