nitrous oxide is traditionally considered to be an inert molecule, and methods for its activation and utilization are currently limited. now, a strategy has been developed — involving an organometallic baeyer–villiger step — for the conversion of aryl halides to phenols under mild conditions, using n2o as the oxygen source.you have full access to this article via your institution.the development of mild and efficient strategies for the construction of carbon–heteroatom bonds remains one of the most important goals in organic chemistry, with particular interest in methods for aromatic c–o bond formation. currently, transition-metal-catalysed ullmann-type chemistry is one of the most popular methods for the construction of c–o bonds1. the traditional catalytic cycle for the transition-metal-catalysed synthesis of phenols involves three fundamental steps: oxidative addition, ligand metathesis and reductive elimination (fig. 1a, left). the oxygen source in these reactions is usually h2o or a protic oxygen-based nucleophile in combination with a base. metallaphotoredox strategies have recently offered an alternative approach to cross-couplings, overcoming the high energy barrier in some fundamental organometallic steps2. for example, site-selective c–h oxygenation via aryl sulfonium salts has been reported, enabling efficient synthesis of complex phenols using water as the oxygen source under dual copper/photoredox catalysis3. however, more methods for c–x bond formation are always in high demand in the synthetic community.a, comparison between traditional aromatic c–o bond formation via reductive elimination (left) and through oxygen insertion (right) for phenol synthesis. o.a., oxidative addition; l.m., ligand metathesis; r.e., reductive elimination; red., reduction; m, transition metal. b, key mechanistic studies looking at the reactivity of terpyridine-supported ni(ii) and ni(i) complexes with n2o. dma, dimethylacetamide; thf-d8, deuterated tetrahydrofuran. c, general reaction scheme starting from various aryl iodides and bromides with optimized conditions, and selected examples.now, writing in nature, josep cornella and co-workers have developed an elegant catalytic approach for the conversion of aryl halides to phenols, using n2o as the oxygen source4. the reaction involves a distinct organometallic baeyer–villiger step, demonstrating a conceptually new approach for the formation of aromatic c–o bonds. nitrous oxide is one of the main contributors to global warming, but methods for the revalorization of this small molecule are currently limited. it has the potential to be a valuable source of oxygen, given its abundance and formation of benign n2 as a by-product, but its activation typically requires harsh conditions and so it is rarely used as oxygen source in the synthetic community5,6. inspired by a seminal report on selective oxygen atom transfer from nitrous oxide to the aryl ligand of a bis(pentamethylcyclopentadienyl)hafnium derivative7, cornella and co-workers envisaged an alternative catalytic cycle to achieve the synthesis of phenols from aryl halides, using n2o as the oxygen source (fig. 1a, right).on considering the ability to tune the oxidative state of nickel8, it was proposed that a nickel catalyst could react with an aryl halide by increasing the oxidation state of the metal through an oxidative addition and single-electron-reduction mechanism. the newly formed nickel complex could then react with n2o through an unusual organometallic baeyer–villiger step to achieve oxygen atom insertion7. with the help of a single-electron-reduction process by a suitable reductive transition metal, the nickel catalyst could be turned over successfully.putting this concept into practice, cornella and co-workers synthesized a bipyridine-supported ni(ii) complex and studied its reactivity with n2o. high yields of phenol (73%) could only be obtained when a combination of zinc (3 equiv.) and sodium iodide (1 equiv.) were used under an n2o atmosphere. based on this exciting preliminary result, a library of bipyridine-based ligand scaffolds were investigated, with terpyridine (l18) and 6-pyrazolyl-2,2ʹ-bipyridine (l50) giving the best results. three ligand features were found to be key in their effect on catalytic activity — replacing the nitrogen atom with either carbon or sulfur was found to shut down reactivity, and both steric bulk and electron-deficient substituents on the pyrazole were found to give poor results.to confirm the unique reaction mechanism, a terpyridine–ni derivative was prepared and subjected to the standard reaction conditions. the desired phenol was obtained in good yield, demonstrating the existence of the ni(i)–c(sp2) intermediate in the catalytic cycle (fig. 1b, left). further evidence for this intermediate was found from the reaction of (tbu-terpy)ni(i)–i with ph2zn under n2o atmosphere, forming the desired phenol in 20% yield (fig. 1b, right). these findings suggest that the ni(i) complex was formed from the ni(ii) complex through an oxidative addition and single-electron-reduction mechanism. labelling studies were carried out to confirm n2o as the oxygen source. when using oxygen-labelled solvent, 18o incorporation in the product was not found, but when using n15n18o, 22% of the oxygen in the phenol product was labelled.with the optimized conditions in hand, and having established the mechanism of this elegant transformation, cornella and co-workers investigated the synthetic utility of the developed reaction through testing various aryl iodides and aryl bromides (fig. 1c). the corresponding phenols could be obtained efficiently with good to excellent yields under mild conditions. the catalytic platform not only tolerated a wide variety of functional groups (halogens, ketone, nitrile, ester, methoxyl, thiomethyl) but was also found to be compatible with heterocycles, such as indole, quinolone, carbazole, piperazinone, azetidine, pyrrolidinone and dibenzothiophene. this method was also efficiently applied to the synthesis of complex architectures that are difficult to access through existing synthetic methods, further highlighting the advance of current strategy. additionally, this approach could be scaled up to 5 mmol with a similar yield, demonstrating the potential further application in medicinal chemistry. finally, this method was successfully applied in the synthesis of key scaffolds towards metaxolone and bazedoxifene.the elegant work by cornella and co-workers marks a number of advances in aromatic c–o bond formation, and in the utilization of n2o in synthetic organic chemistry. we expect that this unique organometallic baeyer–villiger step may be utilized by different synthetic groups around the world to design new and exciting reaction mechanisms for the construction of carbon–carbon and carbon–heteroatom bonds with conceptually different pathways under sustainable conditions. future studies could see this particular strategy being extended to other aromatic c–x bond formation, as well as multicomponent reactions. this discovery has the potential to inspire future developments employing n2o as an oxygen source in synthetic chemistry and contribute to new advances in the development of sustainable chemistry with cheap transition-metal catalysis.sambiagio, c., marsden, s. p., blacker, a. j. & mcgowan, p. c. chem. soc. rev. 43, 3525–3550 (2014).cas article google scholar chan, a. y. et al. chem. rev. 122, 1485–1542 (2022).cas article google scholar sang, r. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 58, 16161–16166 (2019).cas article google scholar le vaillant, f. et al. nature 604, 677–683 (2022).article google scholar severin, k. chem. soc. rev. 44, 6375–6386 (2015).cas article google scholar gianetti, t. l. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 55, 1854–1858 (2015).article google scholar vaughan, g. a., rupert, p. b. & hillhouse, g. l. j. am. chem. soc. 109, 5538–5539 (1987).cas article google scholar terrett, j. a., cuthbertson, j. d., shurtleff, v. w. & macmillan, d. w. c. nature 524, 330–334 (2015).cas article google scholar download referencesschool of physical science and technology, shanghaitech university, shanghai, chinajun-jie chen & huan-ming huangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to huan-ming huang.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionschen, jj., huang, hm. n2o revalorization. nat. chem. 14, 846–848 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01007-xdownload citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01007-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 