normal human cells have two copies of each chromosome. by contrast, many cancer cells have abnormal numbers of chromosomes, either having extra copies or lacking some. the most common reason for such abnormalities is the result of defective cell division, specifically, a failure to distribute the cell’s chromosomes equally between the two newly forming daughter cells. writing in nature, klaasen et al.1 report that the 3d location of chromosomes in the nucleus before cell division affects their likelihood of being incorrectly partitioned in the daughter cells. read the paper: nuclear chromosome locations dictate segregation error frequenciesthe authors set out to answer a simple question. do all chromosomes have the same chance of being mis-segregated during cell division? to address this, klaasen and colleagues turned to several types of human cell grown under conditions that promote chromosome mis-segregation during division. they used dna sequencing of single cells to globally monitor the sets of chromosomes in all daughter cells. strikingly, their results indicate that not all chromosomes mis-segregate at the same frequency. some were more likely than others to be incorporated incorrectly into the daughter cells, or to be found in structures called micronuclei, which are aberrant, nucleus-like structures that often contain only one chromosome and can form during defective cell division.the authors asked what makes chromosomes particularly prone to mis-segregation, but found no clear relationship to several chromosomal features, such as the size of a region called the centromere or the length of the chromosome ‘arms’. however, they identified a robust correlation with the 3d location of a chromosome in the nucleus before cell division. chromosomes that were generally positioned more peripherally and closer to the membrane of the nucleus were more prone to be mis-segregated than were chromosomes residing at the centre of the nucleus. klaasen et al. used several methods to show that a chromosome’s location can determine its fate. most tellingly, artificial tethering of a chromosome that was normally centrally located, so that it was relocated to the nuclear periphery, resulted in its more frequent mis-segregation.a hint about the mechanism responsible for the higher segregation defects of peripheral compared with central chromosomes came from the imaging of live cells. the authors monitored individual central and peripheral chromosomes in dividing cells, and found that peripheral chromosomes took longer to align properly in the middle of the dividing cell — at what is known as the metaphase plate — than central chromosomes did.together, these observations suggest a model for the mechanism that is based on what we know about how chromosomes behave during cell division (fig. 1). as the cell begins to divide during the prometaphase stage of the cell cycle, an elongated structure called the mitotic spindle develops, formed of protein filaments called microtubules; this attaches to the centromere of each chromosome, helping to align chromosomes in the middle of the dividing cell. subsequently, during the anaphase stage of cell division, the spindle pulls chromosomes to the two newly forming daughter cells. klaasen et al. propose that peripheral chromosomes are more likely to be mis-segregated than are central chromosomes because they take longer to travel to the middle of the cell to align, and also take longer to orient themselves, as was observed in the imaging experiments. the resulting delay in getting chromosomes ready for division might increase the likelihood of their mis-segregation.figure 1 | consequences of a chromosome’s nuclear position. klaasen et al.1 analysed human cells, and report that chromosomes found at peripheral locations of the nucleus at the interphase stage of the cell cycle are more likely to give rise to abnormalities than are chromosomes located in central nuclear regions. the spindle is a structure that enables chromosomal partitioning into daughter cells at cell division. the authors’ observations indicate that peripheral chromosomes might take longer than central chromosomes when moving (blue arrows) to make proper contact with spindle components at a stage of the cell cycle called prometaphase. the data also suggest that peripheral chromosomes take longer than central chromosomes to align in the middle of a dividing cell at metaphase. these abnormalities can result in peripheral chromosomes not being correctly included in the newly forming nucleus of a daughter cell. defects might therefore arise, such as abnormal numbers of nuclear chromosomes and the formation of a chromosome-containing structure called a micronucleus.klaasen and colleagues’ results build on, and expand, several previous observations about genome organization. it has long been known that chromosomes are non-randomly positioned in the cell nucleus during the interphase stage of the cell cycle, which occurs before division2. the location of chromosomes relative to the nuclear periphery correlates with chromosome size and overall transcriptional activity, with smaller and transcriptionally active chromosomes preferentially located at the centre of the nucleus3. consistent with those findings, klaasen et al. observe a contribution of chromosome size to mis-segregation frequency. the new results suggest that chromosome position also has a role in ensuring proper chromosome segregation. genome doubling causes double troublean aberrant number of chromosomes, or aneuploidy, is associated with conditions such as down syndrome, but is also a particularly prominent hallmark of certain types of cancer4. furthermore, a role for the 3d positioning of chromosomes in cancer has previously been demonstrated for another common type of cancer-related genome rearrangement, known as a chromosome translocation5. such rearrangements occur when chromosome fragments generated by two breaks in dna are incorrectly rejoined to form hybrid chromosomes. live-cell tracking showed that translocations preferentially form between chromosomes that are close together in the nucleus at interphase5. it thus seems that the 3d location of chromosomes can contribute to cancer-promoting genome rearrangement in multiple ways.finally, it is well established that the types of genomic rearrangement and the chromosomes involved in nuclear defects often vary between tumours in different tissues. this phenomenon is caused, in part, by growth selection — the preferential proliferation of cells that have growth advantages as a result of the specific genetic rearrangements they contain6. klaasen and colleagues’ work suggests that, in addition, the 3d position of chromosomes might contribute to such tissue specificity of genomic rearrangements in cancer, by affecting which chromosomes are involved in aneuploidy. this idea is consistent with the observation that the arrangement of chromosomes in 3d space is often tissue-specific2,3. how much of the observed tissue specificity of genome rearrangements is due to growth selection compared with mis-segregation driven by chromosome location is an intriguing and important question. regardless of the answer, klaasen and colleagues’ study demonstrates yet another functional role of 3d genome organization in cells and tissues.