although the multitude of pathways involved in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) seem to be interconnected, each predominates in only a fraction of patients. this complexity means that many agents tested in sle clinical trials — now including iberdomide — produce only a small clinical benefit.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to merrill, j. t. et al. phase 2 trial of iberdomide in systemic lupus erythematosus. n. engl. j. med. 386, 1034–1045 (2022).multiple genetic, environmental and epigenetic factors contribute to the development of systemic autoimmunity, inflammation and multi-organ damage in the disease known as systemic lupus erythematosus (sle). practically all domains of the innate and the adaptive immune system are involved, and multiple molecular, biochemical and metabolic aberrations within each domain have been recognized in this disease1. numerous trials have been conducted in people with sle, each focused on targeting particular molecules and/or pathways under the assumption that they are the dominant disease mechanisms in all, or at least in the majority, of the patients enrolled in the studies. the approval of belimumab and voclosporin for the treatment of lupus nephritis and of anifrolumab for non-renal sle has attracted interest in conducting even more trials, but without modifying the primary or secondary outcomes or considering who among the enrollees has the best chance of experiencing a clinical benefit. in one of the latest phase ii trials, iberdomide, a small molecule drug that promotes the proteosomal degradation of ikaros and aiolos, two transcription factors involved in b cell and t cell proliferation and differentiation, reportedly delivered clinical improvement in some patients with sle2.ikaros (encoded by ikzf1) and its family members aiolos (encoded by ikzf3), helios and eos/dedalos are sequence-specific dna-binding factors that belong to the kruppel transcription factor family. ikaros is important in lymphoid development, and its genetic deficiency causes complete lack of lymphoid cells including b cells, t cells, natural killer cells and dendritic cells. at a later stage of lymphocyte differentiation, loss of ikaros arrests b cell differentiation at the proliferative large pre-b cell stage and prevents transition to the quiescent small pre-b cells, memory b cells and plasmablast differentiation3 (fig. 1).the cereblon modulator iberdomide binds the crl4crbn e3 ubiquitin ligase complex to induce ubiquitylation of ikaros and aiolos, resulting in their proteasomal degradation and ultimately the suppression of b cell and plasmablast differentiation. the e3 ubiquitin ligases grail, cbl-b and stub1 contribute to t cell and b cell lymphocyte homeostasis by regulating t cell receptor (tcr) signalling, cell proliferation, cytokine production and nlrp3 inflammasome activation. preliminary data suggest cereblon and stub1 activity is increased in systemic lupus erythematosus (sle), whereas grail and cbl-b activity is decreased.ubiquitylation is needed to tame inflammation. this important post-translational protein modification involves the covalent conjugation of ubiquitin to lysine residues on specific protein substrates in order to regulate their degradation. the ubiquitylation process is catalysed by three classes of enzymes: e1 enzymes, e2 enzymes and e3 ligases. iberdomide interacts with cereblon, which is part of the cullin ring ligase 4-cereblon (crl4crbn) e3 ubiquitin ligase complex, to induce ubiquitylation of ikaros and aiolos, resulting in their proteasomal degradation.the rationale for the reported phase ii trial of iberdomide for the treatment of sle2 was based on reports that polymorphisms in ikzf1 and ikzf3 increase the risk of development of sle4; evidence that aiolos expression is increased in b cells from patients with sle and is also associated with increased numbers of circulating double negative b cells and increased levels of baff (long considered to be involved in the expression of the disease); and, finally, that iberdomide suppresses antibody production by b cells from patients with sle in vitro5.in the phase ii trial, 288 patients with sle were randomly allocated to receive oral iberdomide (at a dose of 0.15 mg, 0.30 mg or 0.45 mg) or placebo once daily for 24 weeks, in addition to standard care. the percentage of patients who achieved the primary end point of an sle responder index (sri-4) response at 24 weeks was greater with iberdomide than with placebo only for the group that received the highest dose of the drug (54% versus 35%). notably, a number of secondary end points were not met, including reduction in the use of glucocorticoids, improvement in joint and skin involvement and no new disease activity as measured using the bilag index.a number of observations limit the excitement for the future success of iberdomide. the lack of a dose response curve suggests the two smaller doses were insufficient, and the lack of a dose curve effect in people who had a high aiolos gene-expression signature at baseline are of concern. the authors acknowledge the disappointing (yet not unprecedented) underrepresentation of black people in the study. considering that sle is a disease with a higher prevalence, morbidity and mortality in patients of african descent, the generalizability of the results remains a serious question. although it is understandable that patients with severe disease are routinely excluded from phase ii studies, no one can predict the utility of iberdomide in patients with severe disease. we should also note that the chosen end point of 24 weeks compromises the utility of the data for a chronic disease such as sle.the phase ii trial led by merrill and colleagues2 used a drug that targets only a certain part of the ubiquitylation processes. in addition to ikaros and ailos, several other components of the ubiquitylation process have been linked to sle and could be considered targets for therapy (fig. 1). for example, e3 ubiquitin-protein ligase rnf128 (also known as grail) is a negative regulator of t cell receptor (tcr) responsiveness and cytokine production, and is a dominant player in the induction and maintenance of t cell anergy. grail−/− mice display enhanced t cell proliferation and differentiation to t helper 1 (th1) and th17 lineages, and have a profound multi-organ inflammatory response. grail works in concert with the deubiquitylase otub1 to balance anergy and activation of t cells6 (fig. 1). rationally, targeting the grail pathway could be anticipated to deliver a broad anti-inflammatory effect.e3 ubiquitin-protein ligase cbl-b acts as a negative regulator in signalling pathways that involve tcrs and b cell receptors, cd28, cd40 and c-type lectin receptors that are known to regulate innate and adoptive immune responses. cbl-b deficiency or inactivation leads to hyper-activation of canonical and noncanonical nlrp3 inflammasomes7. the absence of cbl-b impairs the development of induced t regulatory cells, and causes t cell resistance to anergy by interfering with molecules involved in the tcr signalling pathway (fig. 1).t cell surface glycoprotein cd3ζ chain, an important tcr–cd3 signalling protein, is ubiquitylated at increased levels in sle t cells, and this leads to its degradation. also increased in sle t cells is the ubiquitylation and degradation of serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (srsf1), which promotes the upregulation of cd3ζ chain expression in t cells and the production of il-2 (ref.8). the transcription factor mhc class ii regulatory factor rfx1 is degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system in t cells from patients with sle via the e3 ubiquitin-protein ligase chip (also known as stub1) (fig. 1), which is upregulated in cd4+ t cells from patients with sle9. data in sle t cells have shown an increase in the expression of traf5, a molecule that has been suggested to promote rorγt ubiquitylation, and control th17 cell function8.the iberdomide trial2 did not report any notable side effects, but it should not evade a sceptic that this drug is a cereblon modulator, as is thalidomide10, and although pregnancy avoidance can be achieved in a well-controlled trial environment, it would be of concern if the drug is introduced to the real world where the majority of the patients will be young women. lastly, as noted above, multiple aspects of ubiquitylation are abnormal in patients with sle. the decision of which one to target and in what group of patients should be considered in the context of the much needed and delayed precision medicine in sle. we can keep trying different drugs to treat sle until we find the panacea or, alternatively, we could spend more time and effort to understand the process involved in this highly heterogeneous disease.tsokos, g. c. autoimmunity and organ damage in systemic lupus erythematosus. nat. immunol. 21, 605–614 (2020).cas article google scholar merrill, j. t. et al. phase 2 trial of iberdomide in systemic lupus erythematosus. n. engl. j. med. 386, 1034–1045 (2022).cas article google scholar georgopoulos, k. the making of a lymphocyte: the choice among disparate cell fates and the ikaros enigma. genes dev. 31, 439–450 (2017).cas article google scholar vyse, t. j. & cunninghame graham, d. s. trans-ancestral fine-mapping and epigenetic annotation as tools to delineate functionally relevant risk alleles at ikzf1 and ikzf3 in systemic lupus erythematosus. int. j. mol. sci. 21, 8383 (2020).cas article google scholar nakayama, y. et al. aiolos overexpression in systemic lupus erythematosus b cell subtypes and baff-induced memory b cell differentiation are reduced by cc-220 modulation of cereblon activity. j. immunol. 199, 2388–2407 (2017).cas article google scholar whiting, c. c., su, l. l., lin, j. t. & garrison fathman, c. grail: a unique mediator of cd4 t-lymphocyte unresponsiveness. febs j. 278, 47–58 (2011).cas article google scholar tang, j. et al. sequential ubiquitination of nlrp3 by rnf125 and cbl-b limits inflammasome activation and endotoxemia. j. exp. med. 217, e20182091 (2020).article google scholar moulton, v. r. & tsokos, g. c. t cell signaling abnormalities contribute to aberrant immune cell function and autoimmunity. j. clin. invest. 125, 2220–2227 (2015).article google scholar guo, y., zhao, m. & lu, q. transcription factor rfx1 is ubiquitinated by e3 ligase stub1 in systemic lupus erythematosus. clin. immunol. 169, 1–7 (2016).cas article google scholar ito, t. & handa, h. molecular mechanisms of thalidomide and its derivatives. proc. jpn. acad. ser. b 96, 189–203 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesdivision of rheumatology and clinical immunology, department of medicine, beth israel deaconess medical center, harvard medical school, boston, ma, usaafroditi boulougoura & george c. tsokosyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to george c. tsokos.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsboulougoura, a., tsokos, g.c. ikaros, aiolos and other moving targets to treat sle. nat rev rheumatol 18, 499–500 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-022-00815-2download citationpublished: 13 july 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41584-022-00815-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 