the golden rule — do unto others as you would have them do unto you — is cheerfully broken by most social interactions. for instance, citing your colleague’s paper does not necessarily mean that they will cite yours in return. by contrast, many physical laws dictate reciprocity. the best example of this is perhaps isaac newton’s third law of motion, which states that every action has an equal and opposite reaction, a tenet that applies even to atoms in a crystal. but this requires the crystal to be in equilibrium, or close to it. writing in nature, tan et al.1 report the self-assembly of a different type of crystal, one composed of starfish embryos floating on water, which can be thought of as ‘atoms’ far from thermodynamic equilibrium. the behaviour of this living crystal exhibits a mechanical non-reciprocity called odd elasticity2, which is prohibited in equilibrium. read the paper: odd dynamics of living chiral crystalswhat is odd elasticity? in an ordinary crystal at equilibrium (imagine a metal, or even table salt), reciprocal interactions between atoms result in the mechanical properties that we are used to: if you push on a material, it pushes directly back. however, exotic crystals that are out of equilibrium can have non-reciprocal interactions with large-scale mechanical consequences: ‘odd’ responses to mechanical stimuli occur, which are forbidden by classical mechanics and which break the golden rule of reciprocity. for example, compression and rotation couple non-reciprocally in these odd materials: compressing the material causes rotational stress, but rotation does not cause compressional stress. despite their name, these odd couplings are not so odd: they are generically expected when the constraints of equilibrium are lifted.tan and colleagues’ experiments demonstrate these features beautifully. the starfish embryos sit at an air–water interface and spin spontaneously, forming a 2d living crystal, which also undergoes a collective rotation. as the starfish spin, they pull fluid towards them and downwards. this fluid motion causes a reciprocal attractive force between embryos, which affects their potential energy — the stored energy that is determined solely by their relative positions in the crystal, and is similar to the interaction energy of atoms in a crystal at equilibrium (fig. 1). but the motion of the fluid also generates a second transverse force that cannot be ascribed to potential energy, and constitutes an odd-material behaviour. such non-reciprocal forces are not specific to starfish embryos3. they occur naturally as a direct consequence of the non-equilibrium nature of living matter.figure 1 | non-reciprocal interactions between starfish embryos. a, tan et al.1 report the formation of a crystal in which the ‘atoms’ are starfish embryos floating on water, which spin around their own axis. hydrodynamic interactions between two spinning embryos give rise to a reciprocal attractive force (blue arrows), but also a non-reciprocal transverse force (red arrows), which causes spontaneous rotation of the embryos around one another. b, the attractive forces cause many of these embryos to cluster into a crystal. this cluster spins as a whole. the microscopic transverse forces give this crystal an ‘odd’ elastic response, which is forbidden by classical mechanics.the polish scientist stanislaw ulam once said: ask not what physics can do for biology. ask what biology can do for physics. indeed, living systems provide intriguing — if messy — platforms for studying the ideas of non-equilibrium physics. tan and colleagues’ experiments continue the fruitful trend of distilling biological systems to their essential components4–7 to clarify the basic properties that matter possesses when it comes alive8. but such experiments also pose questions for biologists. by understanding the essential physics of these purified biomimetic systems, we gain insights into the in vivo biological system from which they came.for an example of this simplification procedure in action, take active nematics5, a class of material composed of elongated particles that actively pull or push on each other. passive nematics form the basis of liquid-crystal displays, and the well-established theories describing these systems have been adapted to describe the intriguing behaviours that arise in their active counterparts. liquid crystals in living tissuethe cytoskeleton — the meshwork of biopolymers that gives a cell its structure — can be described as an active nematic system. researchers therefore use purified mixtures of these polymers to study the physics of active nematics, with a level of quantitative detail that can’t be achieved inside the cell6. but insights into the patterns formed have not been restricted to the physics of the purified components. instead, these ideas are beginning to feed back into the biological context from which they came. for example, an active nematic framework gave rise to the revelation that defects in nematic ordering can help to coordinate the development of organisms7.in the same vein, tan and colleagues’ identification of odd elasticity in a biological system invites two broader questions. first, how widespread are odd behaviours in living matter? second, do they serve some biological function? the team’s experiments demonstrate the fundamental link between oddness and chirality (handedness): odd elasticity necessarily implies that a material can be distinguished as being either right-handed or left-handed. in tan and co-workers’ experiments, chirality dictates the direction of rotation of the starfish embryos. more generally, chirality is found in many biological systems, so the findings hint at the idea that odd behaviour might also be commonplace. could it imply a role for chirality that hasn’t yet been revealed? an exceptional view of phase transitions in non-equilibrium systemsseen instead from a design perspective, the platform that tan et al. have developed is a step along the road to animate matter9 — materials that are able to sense, compute and respond to an external stimulus. such materials might mimic animate behaviour by synthetic means10, as in the realization of odd elasticity in a system of spinning colloids, reported this year11. alternatively, they might directly include biological elements, as is the case in the starfish-embryo crystals. this latter approach has the advantage that an internal energy reservoir is built into the system: the odd elasticity demonstrated by tan et al. lasts for several hours without external input, stopping only when embryo growth breaks the crystal apart.in what sense is an odd material animate? tan and colleagues’ system generates spontaneous waves of oscillations in the positions of the embryos, and these waves persist throughout the lifetime of the crystal. a theoretical prediction for odd materials is that such waves can be induced in response to external compression — or, more generally, that a system displaying odd behaviour will exhibit oscillatory motion in response to specific stimuli. such dynamical states could form the basis of mechanical programming and computation in the material itself; for example, by switching between different dynamical states in response to different stimuli.tan and co-workers’ study sits at the nexus of materials design and fundamental physics: their system gives us a glimpse into how breaking the golden rule of reciprocity leads to intriguing emergent behaviour in active solids. although odd elasticity is one hallmark of living crystals, there are likely to be many others. we are yet to understand the broader principles of designer materials created using living constituents.