chemical probes are powerful tools for the discovery of ligand-binding and drug-target sites on proteins. a new software helps to profile their performance in chemoproteomic applications.you have full access to this article via your institution.chemoproteomics (or chemical proteomics) is a sub-discipline of proteomics that studies the interaction of small molecules with proteins. many chemoproteomics studies use chemical probes that form covalent bonds with the proteins they interact with. common application areas include metabolite–protein interactions and drug discovery1,2,3, and mass spectrometry is typically used to identify the binding sites of these probes. however, dedicated software tools for analyzing mass spectrometry data from chemoproteomics experiments have been rare. yang and co-workers now introduce pchem, a new software specifically developed for the detailed characterization of chemical probes in proteome-scale mass-spectrometry studies4 (fig. 1). the tool provides a detailed assessment of the efficiency, selectivity and product homogeneity of covalent binders.after a proteome is exposed to a chemical probe in two isotopic forms, proteins are digested into peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry. pchem uses information at both the intact-peptide level and fragment level to obtain a functional profile of the probe that includes scores on profiling efficiency, residue selectivity and product homogeneity.chemical probes bind to their target sites via a variety of functional groups. typically, researchers anticipate the reactivity of these groups because their chemistry seems to be well understood. therefore, a common data-analysis strategy for chemoproteomics studies is to pre-define the expected type of modification (the exact product that forms) and the site of modification (the amino acid(s) that will react). however, in the biological environment and at the proteome-wide scale, chemistry can sometimes be unpredictable. the specific ‘microenvironment’ of a ligand-binding pocket or a catalytic site may change the reactivity of a functional group in an amino acid, causing unexpected side reactions. in addition, certain probes may be prone to degradation during the multiple sample-handling steps required before mass spectrometry analysis. these type of reaction products may go unnoticed in conventional data-analysis workflows, yet their existence may affect biological conclusions drawn from chemoproteomics experiments.pchem builds on the idea of using chemical probes in two different forms: one that contains only natural isotopes, and one that incorporates stable heavy isotopes such as 13c (fig. 1). probes can be directly synthesized in differently labeled forms, or the isotope label can be introduced in a separate reaction step, such as by click chemistry5,6. the isotopic signature of ‘light–heavy’ pairs has a long tradition in proteomics, such as for relative quantification7 or for structural analysis by chemical cross-linking8, because it is easy to interpret these signal patterns by mass spectrometry. for chemical probes, this signature makes it easy to identify peptides carrying modified sites on the basis of their known mass difference, but pchem goes further: the software also uses the isotope coding to identify probe-derived side products and localize modifications to specific residues, and it has sophisticated error models to assess the reliability of the results (fig. 1). these features distinguish this tool from other software that looks for unexpected modifications in so-called ‘open’ or ‘blind’ searches. as a result, more modifications can be identified and assigned to specific reactive sites in proteins, including ‘off targets’.to demonstrate the usefulness of pchem, the authors used publically available and in-house-generated datasets covering 18 probes to benchmark their software, recovering 21 of the 22 expected products and at least 11 unexpected additional products. these case studies include some of the most commonly used types of probes, including those that target specific amino acids and post-translational modifications. for example, the cysteine specificity of common iodoalkyl probes was readily identified. however, compounds carrying the photoreactive diazirine group that was previously expected to react fairly nonspecifically instead showed a clear preference for glutamic acid and cysteine, in line with a recent independent study9. proximity-labeling methods that are commonly expected to label exclusively tyrosines also yielded products with lysines and cysteines, and the authors proposed possible reaction mechanisms that would lead to their formation. in a similar way, chemical probes that target oxidative (post-translational) modifications on cysteines and probes that study the targets of lipid electrophiles such as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal were investigated in detail, and new modifications were uncovered.pchem offers a powerful solution for the in-depth characterization of chemical probes that result in stable modifications. reanalysis of literature data shows that the software is able to assess the efficiency and site selectivity of probes in chemoproteomics experiments and can uncover different, sometimes unexpected reaction products. pchem promises results with less emphasis on manual data curation and will therefore facilitate both the design and evaluation of new types of probes, as well as the optimization of reaction conditions (for example, those that minimize side reactions) for chemoproteomics experiments. the tool provides hypotheses that can be followed up in conjunction with more-conventional proteomics data-analysis pipelines. it is therefore not a complete pipeline that covers the entire computational workflow, but it will be a very helpful tool for many use cases in academia and industry. on a more general level, the software will provide new insights into chemical reactivity in complex biological settings. the broader use of stable isotope labeling in proteomics might also offer an expansion of the concept to structural mass spectrometry applications such as protein cross-linking8 or protein–rna cross-linking10. pchem might be providing new insights in these areas as well.meissner, f., geddes-mcalister, j., mann, m. & bantscheff, m. nat. rev. drug discov. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-022-00409-3 (2022).article pubmed google scholar qin, w., yang, f. & wang, c. curr. opin. chem. biol. 54, 28–36 (2020).cas article google scholar benns, h. j., wincott, c. j., tate, e. w. & child, m. a. curr. opin. chem. biol. 60, 20–29 (2021).cas article google scholar he, j.-x. et al. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01074-8 (2022).article pubmed google scholar yang, j., tallman, k. a., porter, n. a. & liebler, d. c. anal. chem. 87, 2535–2541 (2015).cas article google scholar abo, m., li, c. & weerapana, e. mol. pharm. 15, 743–749 (2018).cas article google scholar gygi, s. p. et al. nat. biotechnol. 17, 994–999 (1999).cas article google scholar müller, d. r. et al. anal. chem. 73, 1927–1934 (2001).article google scholar west, a. v. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 143, 6691–6700 (2021).cas article google scholar dorn, g. et al. nat. methods 14, 487–490 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of biology, institute of molecular systems biology, eth zürich, zurich, switzerlandalexander leitneryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to alexander leitner.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsleitner, a. probing the secrets of probes. nat chem biol 18, 799–800 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01092-6download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01092-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 