a real-time early warning system for sepsis detection shows promising adoption by healthcare providers and important improvements in patient outcomes.you have full access to this article via your institution.artificial intelligence (ai) has great potential to improve how healthcare is delivered. one of many promising areas of focus for this technology is the early detection of sepsis to allow rapid intervention with appropriate therapy — such as antibiotics or intravenous fluid resuscitation — so as to mitigate or prevent further complications, including death. in this issue of nature medicine, two complementary manuscripts describe the prospective evaluation of patient outcomes (adams et al.1) and institutional adoption (henry et al.2) of the targeted real-time early warning system (trews) for sepsis detection1,2.sepsis is a notoriously difficult condition to manage, mainly because of challenges with its early detection, and it continues to have a high mortality rate; a recent meta-analysis reported a pooled 30-day rate of 24%3. sepsis can develop outside or inside the hospital, on general care units or in the icu — in one study, 41% of cases occurred outside the icu, where patients are less closely monitored4.most efforts to improve sepsis care using ai have focused on facilitating timely, rapid responses to initiate life-saving therapy. there are now several reports describing instances in which organizations have achieved major improvements. for example, one us-based healthcare organization developed and implemented a rules-based early detection algorithm called sepsis prediction and optimization of therapy (spot) across 173 hospitals, which led to an almost 10% reduction in mortality for patients with severe sepsis5. with the same aim, investigators at duke developed a deep learning model called sepsis watch, which detected sepsis a median of 5 hours earlier than occurred otherwise and has been deployed in emergency departments across their health system, with clinical trial results forthcoming6,7.however, one of the most widely used models, the epic sepsis model, was found upon external validation to have poor discrimination and calibration in detecting the onset of sepsis8. this model was developed in only a few hospitals, and then deployed in hundreds more without refinement for local contexts, including data structures. the model had a sensitivity of only 33%, while generating alerts on 18% of admissions, causing substantial alert fatigue. thus, there is great need both for better models and for testing of models at individual sites to ensure consistent performance.the current studies evaluated the trews decision support system, which was implemented at five hospitals over two years. henry et al. reported high adoption rates — 89% of alerts were evaluated and 38% of these were confirmed2. based on clinical consultations, the investigators set a goal of, and achieved, a sensitivity of ~80% for each hospital using site-specific historical data. deployment resulted in earlier initiation of antibiotic treatment — by a median of 1.85 hours — for sepsis alerts that were evaluated within 3 hours, compared with alerts that took longer to evaluate.adams et al. showed that the algorithm performed well for the particular patient population under study: those who triggered a sepsis alert in the emergency department or inpatient setting who were not admitted directly to the icu, and who had not had an antibiotic ordered before the trews alert (but received them within 24 hours after it)1. this notably excluded important subgroups of patients, such as those receiving antibiotics for known infections that could progress to sepsis, as well as surgical patients at risk of sepsis who might be treated prophylactically. the evaluation showed that more timely intervention, facilitated by the alerts, improved patient outcomes: among 6,877 patients with sepsis, mortality was 19% lower in those who received prompt confirmation of an alert (within 3 hours) relative to those who did not. benefits were even greater among patients who were identified as high risk.generally, it is difficult to fully assess why proprietary algorithms, such as the trews, are efficacious. the algorithm may have performed well by leveraging an electronic health records (ehr)-based phenotype to identify cases which accounted for comorbid conditions that could be mistaken for sepsis; by considering a wide range of variables, including vital signs, laboratory results, clinician notes, medication, procedures and clinical histories; or by developing a mixture of expert models to account for diverse patient contexts. the tool used passive alerts — which may be beneficial, given that care teams experience alert fatigue from too many interruptive alerts, although it might be unnecessary if performance were improved. the tool also activated a sepsis bundle panel (a group of orders for interventions and tests) to initiate recommended therapy when alerts were confirmed, making it easier for care teams to take the right actions.similar diagnostic and decision support tools, many leveraging ai, will be deployed in the coming years. today, there is an abundance of patient data readily available in ehr systems, making it possible to identify those whose conditions may deteriorate, and we expect that these algorithms will become more accurate as continuous monitoring becomes the standard of care. institutions should be actively developing approaches to help clinicians think about adopting ai models in practice and building clinical skills around how to interpret and act on these alerts.the us food and drug administration (fda) is considering how to regulate applications leveraging ai, which is likely to involve a paradigm shift. models may be most effective when developed locally and allowed to learn continuously to become more generalizable over time, but current fda regulatory frameworks around ‘locked’ algorithms do not fit well with this kind of approach. only a small number of models used in clinical settings have received fda approval, and providers need to carefully consider the implications of using these technologies to inform patient care.to realize large-scale benefits from technologies such as the trews, these tools will have to be implemented across very diverse health systems. however, hospitals are already struggling to implement and maximize benefits from such technologies. many promising algorithms have been developed by different companies to address specific issues, but it is very challenging for hospitals to work with large numbers of vendors.furthermore, many algorithms require data to be accessible in near real time — something most hospitals are not yet able to achieve. most commercial ehr vendors do not have databases that allow real-time queries. when signals are detected, this information needs to be communicated to the right provider in ways that are acceptable and fit within the clinical workflow. however, ehrs do not routinely document which providers are responsible for a given patient at a specific time.overall, these technologies have great potential to improve care and rapidly identify patients who are deteriorating, especially those with sepsis — which could help prevent deaths and reduce costs for large numbers of patients. achieving these benefits widely across hospitals and health systems will take time and will require that implementers follow the key precepts of using ai to improve care, such as verifying that the model works at multiple sites and that ai-based decision support is communicated to clinicians in ways they find acceptable, as has been done in these two pivotal studies.adams, r. et al. nat. med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01894-0 (2022).henry, k. e. et al. nat. med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01895-z (2022).bauer, m. et al. crit care. 24, 239 (2020).article google scholar sands, k. e. et al. j. am. med. assoc. 278, 234–240 (1997).cas article google scholar perlin, j. b. et al. jt comm. j. qual. patient saf. 46, 381–391 (2020).pubmed google scholar bedoya, a. d. et al. jamia open 3, 252–260 (2020).article google scholar malone, l. duke health referring physicians https://physicians.dukehealth.org/articles/dukes-augmented-intelligence-system-helps-prevent-sepsis-ed (2020).wong, a. et al. jama intern. med. 181, 1065–1070 (2021).article google scholar download referencesdivision of general internal medicine, brigham and women’s hospital, boston, ma, usadavid w. bates & ania syrowatkaharvard medical school, boston, ma, usadavid w. bates & ania syrowatkadepartment of health policy and management, harvard t.h. chan school of public health, boston, ma, usadavid w. batesyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to david w. bates.d.w.b. reports grants and personal fees from earlysense, personal fees from cdi negev, equity from valerahealth, equity from clew, equity from mdclone, personal fees and equity from aesop, personal fees and equity from feelbetter and grants from ibm watson health, outside the submitted work. a.s. received partial salary support from grants funded by ibm watson health, outside of the submitted work.reprints and permissionsbates, d.w., syrowatka, a. harnessing ai in sepsis care. nat med 28, 1351–1352 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01878-0download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01878-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 