credit: s. harris/springer nature limitedthe first patient has been dosed with a base editor — the latest genome-editing technology to enter the clinic — and other trials are set to start soon. these therapeutics are designed to permanently change a single letter in a patient’s genetic code at a specific location, providing new opportunities to silence, mend, modulate and upregulate genes.there’s an almost infinite way to think about using these tools, says john evans, ceo of beam therapeutics, the leading base-editing company.base editors build on a surging pipeline of zinc finger nucleases, talens and crispr-cas9-based gene editors in clinical trials. but whereas those approaches scramble faulty genes by cutting dna, base editors have more sophisticated — and potentially safer — capabilities. base editors combine the precision of crispr-cas9 machinery with deaminase enzymes that can modify the genome, changing cytosine to thymine (c→t) or adenine to guanine (a→g).first in the clinic is verve therapeutics’ verve-101, a liver-targeted pcsk9-silencing base editor developed in collaboration with beam. the phase ib trial in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia started in new zealand in july 2022. verve plans to enrol around 40 patients and will present interim data next year. the company also intends to submit an investigational new drug (ind) application to the fda later this year.beam’s lead candidate, beam-101, boosts fetal haemoglobin production for the treatment of sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia. beam is gearing up to start clinical trials of this drug — which edits patient-derived haematopoietic stem cells (hscs) ex vivo — in the usa later this year.results from the trials will start to provide insight into how these editors stack up against other genome-editing tools.the growing base editor pipeline (table 1) showcases the diverse potential of these drugs, but also highlights the delivery limitations. as with other genome-editing approaches, liver-targeted and ex vivo opportunities dominate. delivery remains a major challenge, evans says. we’re spending now almost as much, if not more, time innovating on the delivery side as on the payload side.drug (sponsor)mechanismindicationdeliverystatusverve-101 (verve)pcsk9 silencingheterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemiain vivo lnpphase ibbeam-101 (beam)activation of fetal haemoglobinsickle cell disease; β-thalassemiaex vivo hscsind approvedbeam-102 (beam)correction of hbs mutationsickle cell diseaseex vivo hscsind-enabling studiesbeam-201 (beam)multiplexed silenced cd7 car-tt cell all; cd7+ amlex vivo t cellsind-enabling studiesunnamed candidate (verve)angptl3 silencingfamilial hypercholesterolaemiain vivo lnppreclinicalbeam-301 (beam)correction of r83c mutationglycogen storage disease 1ain vivo lnppreclinicalunnamed candidate (beam)correction of g1961e mutationsstargardt diseasein vivo aavpreclinicalunnamed candidatea (wave)correction of mutation in serpina1 mrnaα-1 antitrypsin deficiencysubcutaneouspreclinicaladesigned to recruit endogenous rna base editors. aav, adeno-associated virus; all, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; aml, acute myelogenous leukaemia; car-t, chimeric antigen receptor t cell; cta, clinical trial application; hbs, sickle haemoglobin; hsc, haematopoietic stem cell; ind, investigational new drug; lnp, lipid nanoparticle.base editors consist of three components: a guide rna (grna) of about 20 nucleotides that binds dna at a landing site adjacent to the target base; a modified cas9 enzyme that unwinds and ‘nicks’ the dna backbone on the strand opposite the target base; and a base-editing deaminase enzyme that transforms the target from one base into another. the cell’s dna repair mechanisms to fix the nick then match the new base with its counterpart, completing the edit on both strands.this approach was pioneered by harvard researcher and beam co-founder david liu and colleagues. in 2016, they unveiled a rat cytidine deaminase hitched onto the crispr-cas9 platform that could achieve base edits. a year later, they engineered an adenine base editor from an enzyme that performs a related reaction on rna. several research teams have since created base editors with improved editing efficiency and precision.current base editors can only pull off either c→t or a→g switches. but, the four edits that these can collectively make — by editing either dna strand — can address over 60% of known pathogenic single-point mutations, says liu.base editing could provide key safety benefits over cutting approaches, he adds. nucleases, including ‘standard’ cas9, create double-stranded dna breaks to disrupt target genes. but when cells repair these breaks, they can mismatch the ends, causing large rearrangements in the dna. a single cutting event can result in hundreds of possible genotypes depending on how the cell resolves the double-stranded break, adds liu. we can’t dictate what they are. the cell dictates. the end result is yet another toxicity and oncogenicity concern for gene-editing tools.base editing simplifies the process. if you cut one strand, the double helix still holds together. the cell doesn’t have to figure out — now, which end goes with which end? explains liu.so, while crispr-cas9 and other nucleases are more advanced now, base editors could still catch up. in the long run, there’s probably more promise for the technologies that don’t make the double-stranded breakage, since the safety risk is lower, says david schaffer, a professor at uc berkeley who studies gene therapy and genome editing. the potential to do actual edits, as opposed to knocking out, leaves open the possibility for treating more diseases, he adds.this cleaner editing profile also offers the opportunity to stack more edits together in a single treatment.clinical trials of verve and beam’s lead candidates will be important tests of this modality. although entering crowded therapeutic spaces, they may yet differentiate themselves from their rivals.verve came to base editing looking to address the low adherence of patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease to lipid-lowering medications. current regimens include daily oral statins and subcutaneous injections of anti-pcsk9 antibodies every 2–4 weeks. our thesis is, hey, let’s replace that with a one-and-done therapy that’s effective and safe for dramatic lowering of ldl [low density lipoprotein] cholesterol, says verve ceo, sekar kathiresan.this ambitious goal to take on a prevalent disease with approved therapies sets a high bar for both efficacy and safety. but kathiresan thinks base editing fits the bill, with an edge over crispr-cas9-based approaches in preclinical head-to-head comparison studies.verve-101, an adenine base editor originally developed by beam, swaps a base at an exon–intron boundary in pcsk9, leading to mis-splicing and nonsense-mediated decay of the resulting mrna transcript. the treatment is delivered as mrna encoding the base editor plus the grna, formulated in lipid nanoparticles (lnps), which naturally traffic to the liver, where pcsk9 is primarily expressed. in cynomolgus monkeys, a single intravenous infusion of verve-101 almost completely silenced pcsk9 in the liver and slashed serum ldl cholesterol levels by 60%. these effects are maintained at 600 days in monkeys, says kathiresan.verve’s initial focus is on heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia, a genetic condition that causes sky-high levels of circulating ldl cholesterol. but if the editor has a spotless toxicity profile, it might hold potential in non-familial atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease — a major form of cardiovascular disease and one of the biggest killers worldwide. success here would show that gene editing is viable not just for rare diseases, but for common ones too.safety was the biggest factor in verve’s decision to opt for base editing, says kathiresan. we are looking to ultimately take base editing to a common disease affecting millions of patients, so every inch of safety advantage is important to us, he says.the cardiovascular opportunity doesn’t stop at pcsk9, however. verve is also working on a base editor that silences angptl3, another validated lipid-lowering liver target. the angptl3-specific antibody therapy, evinacumab, is approved for homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. sequential dosing of pcsk9 and angptl3 base editors had additive effects on lipid levels in nonhuman primates, verve reported at the american college of cardiology annual meeting in april.beam is placing another bet on β-haemoglobinopathies (table 1). these have become a go-to testing ground for gene-targeting therapies, because of the ability to harvest hscs and edit these ex vivo before reinfusing them back into patients. this addresses some delivery hurdles, while also lowering the risk of off-tissue editing.other gene-editing companies have paved the way with bcl11a, a transcription factor that suppresses fetal haemoglobin expression after this development stage has passed. silencing mutations in bcl11a cause a benign condition called hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin, which protects against sickle cell disease and β-thalassemia. sangamo, crispr therapeutics and intellia used their editors to cut up bcl11a and turn on the fetal haemoglobin gene. beam-101 aims to take a more direct approach, via a base swap in the fetal haemoglobin gene promoter, recreating a natural variant that causes hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin.another beam candidate in ind-enabling studies goes one step further — correcting a single-point mutation to restore sickle haemoglobins to a healthier form. this, for the first time, creates cells that literally don’t have the sickle mutation in them anymore, says evans.as with gene therapies, base editing carries a risk of immunogenicity that investigators will need to watch. the creation of a healthy gene may add another hazard over crispr-enabled deletions. it’s a globin that has never been seen by the patient, says annarita miccio, a principal investigator at inserm who studies gene therapy and genome editing for β-haemoglobinopathies. but gene therapy trial results provide reassurance, notes evans, as immune reactions to newly introduced proteins have generally not been problematic.beam is also engineering cell therapies, using its base editors to ‘multiplex’ several edits to make cancer-killing cells. crispr-cas9 multiplexing tends to max out at three deletions, at which point the effects of so many genomic rearrangements can overwhelm the cell, says evans. not so with base editing. you just put in the editor and as many guides as you want, and you simultaneously edit all of these spots says evans. the cell is fine.with beam-201, which is fast approaching trials, the company makes four edits to generate chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cells for ‘off-the-shelf’ use in patients with t cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. the editors hit trac, cd52, pd1 and cd7 to suppress host rejection of these cells, and improve their efficacy and longevity. the base-editing process is highly efficient — between 96–99% for each edit. these cells are then transduced with a lentivirus encoding an anti-cd7 car to seek out cancer cells.although base editors do not cause chromosomal rearrangements, off-target base editing is still a possibility and a key concern of these first clinical trials.while the grna targets the editor to a 20-nucleotide landing motif, it can still misdirect the drug if it finds similar stretches elsewhere. and the base editor itself operates within a window of about five base pairs, which can lead to ‘bystander edits’ if its cognate base appears more than once in that window. these events can, to some extent, be predicted and screened for, although interpreting the consequences remains a challenge.we can do lots of sequencing and understand the nature of the off-target mutations. but as to what that means for risk for patients, that’s harder to tell, says schaffer.perhaps more worryingly — and in contrast to crispr-cas9 — the biology of base editors may give rise to more random off-target editing. if you don’t have the guide rna, the crispr-cas9 nuclease by itself does not touch the dna. but a base editor, with or without the guide rna, can be active on the dna, explains miccio. this is something you cannot predict.base editors can also edit rna, independently of the grna, she adds.you can do as much as you can in preclinical studies, but probably at the end, the answer will be given by studying the patient, says miccio.researchers are tightening up on these liabilities. liu’s group has engineered a panel of cytosine base editors with 10–100-fold reductions in off-target grna-independent dna editing. another team used mutagenesis to rein in rna editing by three base editors.new delivery strategies could also limit off-target effects. the first-generation editors are delivered as mrnas that are transcribed in target cells — an approach that makes the most of lnp formulations. but these base editors are expressed for as long as the mrna persists. direct delivery of protein editors with shorter half-lives could confer safety advantages.the protein doesn’t hang around — it just has a burst of activity, liu explains. there’s not much opportunity for it to edit off target.packaging these large proteins for intracellular delivery will require novel approaches. engineered dna-free virus-like particles carrying base editors in their protein form can edit dna in the liver and in the eye, liu and coworkers recently showed in mice. the researchers detected minimal off-target editing.getting to other tissue types will require even more innovation. but there are signs of progress.beam has been screening various lnp formulations for improved uptake into various cell types. it can now deliver mrna in vivo to t cells and natural killer cells, potentially providing a way to engineer immune cells directly in patients, the company reported in may at the american society of gene and cell therapy. beam has also partnered with pfizer to get base editors into the central nervous system and muscle.academic researchers are also breaking ground. at washington university, andre lieber and colleagues have achieved in vivo base editing of fetal haemoglobin in mice. they used an hsc-seeking adenoviral vector to deliver the base editor to hscs that had been mobilized from the bone marrow into the circulation. further work is needed to refine the vector, but if translated to the clinic, such an approach would sidestep the need to harvest hscs for ex vivo editing.progress could also come from the broader gene therapy, crispr and oligonucleotide communities, who are also working to deliver various payloads to more cell types.while the first crop of base editors use crispr-cas9 to achieve their precise targeting, researchers are not wedded to this dna-searching machinery. some groups are, for example, coupling base editors to transcription activator-like effector (tale) proteins — bacterial proteins that bind specific dna sequences. one team recently showed that these all-protein base editors might be particularly useful for tackling mitochondrial mutations.companies are also working on base editors that hit rna, rather than dna, to provide transient effects at the transcript level. for these approaches, they may be able to redirect endogenous rna deaminases in human cells that produce a→g switches. we can deliver a highly tuned guide strand into a cell and then let nature take its course from there, says paul bolno, ceo of wave life sciences.for bolno, the impermanence of rna edits offers better dosing control and takes the sting out of potential off-target edits. doing that permanently with dna editing is a question mark, he says.conversely, repeated dosing with an rna base editor has financial and convenience costs, and could create immunogenicity issues that are not encountered with one-and-done approaches.whether targeting dna or rna, base editing isn’t the answer to all genetic conditions. for diseases that are caused by missing genes, repeat expansions and other complex defects, alternative gene-targeting tools — including gene therapy, rna interference and antisense oligonucleotides — are probably needed.and new approaches are already on the horizon. prime editing, also developed by liu’s lab, offers the potential to make any base change or even to rewrite short stretches of dna. instead of relying on a deaminase enzyme to make chemical changes to a base, a reverse transcriptase enzyme uses a ‘prime editing guide rna’ to overwrite target dna. prime medicine, co-founded by liu, is collaborating with beam to advance these therapeutics.researchers in the lab of feng zhang, meanwhile, investigated the ancestral origins of crispr-cas9 in bacteria. they opened up a treasure trove of rna-guided nucleases with diverse mechanisms, providing new avenues for potential therapeutic approaches.i cheer on the whole field because these are incredibly important steps in no longer being beholden to these misspellings in our dna that collectively afflict hundreds of millions of people, says liu.