electrification models used to plan future energy systems have become increasingly sophisticated, but typically oversimplify the financial landscape. new research shows that more accurate accounting of the costs of capital significantly changes the least-cost pathway to providing electrification across sub-saharan africa.you have full access to this article via your institution.as the costs of solar panels — and more recently lithium-ion batteries — have dropped dramatically and the climate crisis has become more acute, stakeholders in electricity and development have been especially interested in the ability of smaller household- and community-scale electricity systems based on these technologies to provide electricity access in regions that traditional grids have failed to reach. these small-scale, decentralized systems save the cost of building out transmission grids and can be deployed very rapidly almost anywhere. solar panels and batteries are very modular — massive solar photovoltaic farms and lithium-ion battery plants are built from essentially the same panels and cells that are found on rooftops and houses — so although there are still economies of scale to building larger centralized systems, scale does not dominate the economics in the way it historically has for conventional power plants. instead, population density and proximity to existing grids now shape the calculus for whether decentralized or centralized solutions are more cost-effective.new research from agutu et al. in nature energy1 improves this calculus by shining the light on a new financial variable: the cost of capital. the researchers show that electrification models, which are used to help governments, global financiers, policy-makers, and technologists compare pathways such as centralized vs. decentralized power systems, have fallen short in accounting for the cost of capital for financing different pathways. in their study, the multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary team looked at how public and private costs of debt and equity vary across countries in sub-saharan africa, how the dominant decentralized and centralized electrification modes have variable access to these types of finance, and how risk premiums vary by country and mode.agutu et al. look at what happens if varying the cost of capital between standalone solar kits and community minigrids is introduced into models for financing. they find that the costs of capital for these decentralized systems in sub-saharan africa are actually up to 32% higher than models widely assume. moreover, if the status quo financing landscape persists, then updating electrification models to include their estimates of the cost of capital significantly changes the least-cost electrification pathway by shifting 240 million people in sub-saharan africa from minigrids to standalone systems.the researchers argue that this is because minigrids operate like utilities and are subject to regulation by national and sub-national governments, which increases risk premiums and limits minigrid developers’ access to debt financing. in contrast, standalone systems have successfully been able to attract and pass on debt financing to the end-users, so much so that building consumer credit histories for broader access to microfinance is a core part of their value proposition2.this influences how we think about electrification pathways. agutu et al. advocate for de-risking and scaling both standalone systems and minigrids through financial instruments, technology standardization, and deploying sufficient capital to build diverse decentralized project portfolios. their results can be used to support a growing need to move beyond isolated minigrids and standalone systems towards interconnected microgrids and grid-connected minigrids, and to include these systems in the scope of public sector electrification projects.prior electrification modelling work, although simplifying the costs of capital, has demonstrated the technical efficacy of these novel architectures in sub-saharan africa and beyond3,4. from a technical perspective, these systems embody some of the best features of standalone systems: widely deployable with low transmission and distribution costs, while also attaining economies of scale and efficiencies from serving diverse uses. but from a financing perspective, agutu et al.’s research shows that community-scale systems in general lie in an awkward gap between consumer micro-finance and public infrastructure finance. de-risking conventional minigrids would certainly help lower the cost of capital for private finance, but re-arranging institutional relationships between minigrid developers and national utilities in sub-saharan africa, such as through deploying utility-owned minigrids and streamlining interconnections, could allow new types of minigrid projects to tap into larger, utility-scale pools of public finance that already have a lower cost of capital.agutu et al.’s study has implications and lessons for future research in addition to electrification pathways. for one, it supports a call for more accessible data on the supply-side costs of decentralized electricity, including the cost of capital. out of necessity, the researchers used expert witnesses and a relatively small sample of firms in the standalone and minigrid sectors to estimate sector-specific costs of capital. their findings show that these sector-specific costs have a significant effect on the least-cost pathway, but unfortunately there is not enough accessible data to yield very robust cost estimates. multi-stakeholder data management frameworks could be used to address these challenges5, but even with limited data on sector-specific costs, the work of agutu et al. makes a strong case that modellers should begin incorporating country-specific costs of capital in electrification planning.agutu, c. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01041-6 (2022).article google scholar off-grid solar market trends report 2018 (international finance corporation, 2017); https://www.lightingglobal.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/2018_off_grid_solar_market_trends_report_summary.pdfcarvallo, j. p., taneja, j., callaway, d. & kammen, d. m. proc. ieee 107, 1906–1922 (2019).article google scholar agua, o. f. b. et al. energies 13, 4454 (2020).mathscinet article google scholar lee, j. t. et al. proc. of the ieee 107, 1803–1819 (2019).article google scholar download referencesuniversity of california, berkeley, ca, usajonathan t. leenew sun road, p.b.c, richmond, ca, usajonathan t. leeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jonathan t. lee.the author declares the following competing interest: employment and personal financial interest in new sun road, p.b.c., an enterprise providing services in electrification projects globally, including sub-saharan africa.reprints and permissionslee, j.t. better models of electricity access finance. nat energy 7, 572–573 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01063-0download citationpublished: 15 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01063-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 