the microenvironment can regulate adult stem cell function during tissue homeostasis and regeneration, but whether and how this is altered in aging is unclear. ichijo et al. find that increased dermal stiffness, as a result of vasculature atrophy, activates cation channel piezo1, leading to interfollicular epidermal stem cell dysregulation.you have full access to this article via your institution.stem cells bear the hallmark ability to self-renew, as well as to differentiate into cells that maintain tissue function and integrity throughout the lifetime of the organism. however, adult stem cells undergo both qualitative and quantitative changes that lead to the associated tissue compromise and dysfunction that characterize aging1,2. understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying stem cell aging is essential for improving age-associated stem cell dysfunction. the maintenance of skin epidermis relies on the self-renewing ability of interfollicular epidermal stem cells (ifescs) residing in the basal layer of the stratified epidermis in mice and humans3,4,5,6. skin aging is associated with a decrease in the number and function of ifescs7, which cause clinical problems including skin fragility and delayed or chronic wound healing8,9. previous studies have identified a variety of intrinsic cues such as dna damages and epigenetic alteration that cause ifesc aging. in contrast, how extrinsic cues cause changes in ifescs is not well understood. in this issue, ichijo and colleagues have identified how changes in the physical properties of the dermis associated with age can lead to ifescs dysfunction7,10. they report that stiffening of the skin arising because vasculature atrophy leads to the activation of the mechanosensitive channel piezo1 and an increase in the differentiation and fragility of ifescs (fig. 1). the results point to the potential of mechanobiology-based strategies to address skin aging and age-associated skin disorders.when skin ages, fibroblasts secrete the anti-angiogenic factor ptx3, leading to regression of the vasculature and consequently to greater dermal stiffness. ifescs can sense the stiffness and open the mechanosensitive ion channel piezo1 to allow ca2+ influx, resulting in induction of aging traits such as augmented differentiation, hemidesmosome fragility and perpendicular cell division.ichijo et al. began by comprehensively comparing young and old ifescs, using immunohistochemistry and rna sequencing. a remarkable difference in aged ifescs they noted was the upregulation of genes related to the response to calcium ions, known to trigger keratinocyte differentiation and hemidesmosome disassembly. they then used intravital imaging of calcium reporter mice in which tamoxifen administration drives the expression of a fluorescent calcium indicator in epidermal basal cells and found that calcium flux is prolonged in aged ifescs as compared to young ones. accordingly, the aged epidermis showed increased characteristics of differentiation, including keratin 10 expression, and downregulation of hemidesmosome molecules such as collagen xvii and plectin.this led the authors to investigate a role for the calcium channel piezo1 in the skin epidermis. piezo1 is known to regulate skin epidermal behaviors in touch sensation and wound healing11,12. however, its role in skin epidermal aging was unknown. when a piezo1 agonist (for example, yoda1) was injected into the dermis, differentiation markers (such as k10) increased while stemness markers (such as col17) decreased, suggesting that piezo1 is involved in epidermal dysregulation during aging. this effect was not seen when piezo1 was genetically deleted in the epidermis. furthermore, the authors found that loss of piezo1 in the aged epidermis alleviated the age-associated increase in epidermal differentiation. thus, the authors established that ifesc aging is mediated by piezo1.what then regulates piezo1 during aging? ichijo et al. identified a key to addressing this question that resides in the underlying dermis. given that piezo1 is a mechanosensitive channel whose activation is regulated by mechanical forces, the authors assessed the stiffness of the dermis. atomic force microscopy showed that dermal stiffness is greatly enhanced in aged skin. to test whether dermal stiffness leads to misguided regulation in its overlying epidermal cells, ichijo et al. cultured primary keratinocytes on top of hydrogels of different stiffnesses. as expected, differentiation was induced and the stemness marker col17 decreased in keratinocytes that grew on the rigid gels. conversely, piezo1-deficient keratinocytes on the rigid gels restored lost aging hallmarks, as seen in keratinocytes on the soft gels. these results suggest the mechanosensitive calcium ion channel piezo1 in ifescs responds to enhanced matrix stiffness in aged skin, leading to dysregulation of ifescs.notably, the authors found that the density of vasculature, known to decrease during aging, affects the dermal stiffness. using genetic mouse models to conditionally overexpress or deplete vascular endothelial growth factor receptor signaling, the authors modulated the level of angiogenesis in the dermis. these experiments compellingly demonstrated that reduced vasculature correlates with a reduced level of collagen i, characteristics of skin dermal aging. this in turn correlated with increased dermal stiffness.the authors further found that the expression of angiogenic genes decreases whereas the expression of anti-angiogenic genes increases during aging using single-cell transcriptomics (scrna-seq) in dermal cells. specifically, the anti-angiogenic factor pentraxin 3 (ptx3) was expressed by a subpopulation of aged fibroblasts. this appear to be functionally relevant as ptx3 deficiency in mice alleviated skin aging phenotypes by enhancing angiogenesis and reduced epidermal differentiation. consistently, ptx3 expression is increased in aged human skin, implying a conserved role of ptx3 in human skin aging.reduced angiogenesis is a general feature of aging in many tissues and organs. however, aged fibroblast-mediated anti-angiogenesis and stem cell aging by microenvironmental stiffness beyond skin remain to be explored. what causes increased ptx3 expression in aged skin? do ptx3– young fibroblasts acquire ptx3 expression when they age? does tissue stiffness induce stem loss in many organs in aging? scrna-seq data included in this paper will be a valuable source to permit further exploration of these questions by the research community.traditionally, tissue stiffness is associated with fibrosis characterized by excessive deposition of collagens in many organs, including lung and liver13. however, this study shows an opposite correlation in which increased dermal stiffness accompanies a decrease in collagen i and elastin in aged skin. to understand these differences, it would be important to further understand how vasculature maintains proper levels of collagens and how reduction in collagens lead to an increase in tissue stiffness during aging.overall, this study provides insights into the regulation of stemness and stem cell functions by the surrounding microenvironment in the skin during aging. the extracellular matrix constitutes a dynamic and complex stem cell niche that can provide not only a physical platform but also biochemical and biomechanical cues to govern stem cell behavior. accumulated evidence from the past decades shows that mechanical stimuli are essential for hair follicle stem cell activation in intact skin and hair follicle regeneration in injured skin14,15. in the current study, vasculature involution-induced niche stiffness promotes a sustained calcium influx in ifescs, resulting in their untimely differentiation and loss. the finding of vascular regulation of dermal stiffness and consequently stem cell aging may hold broad implications for tissue aging.hsu, y., pasolli, h. & fuchs, e. cell 144, 92–105 (2011).cas article google scholar watt, f. m. & jesen, k. b. embo. mol. med. 1, 260–267 (2009).cas article google scholar mesa, k. r. et al. cell stem cell 23, 677–686 (2018).cas article google scholar jones, p. h. & watt, f. m. cell 73, 713–724 (1993).cas article google scholar blanpain, c. & fuchs, e. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 10, 207–217 (2009).cas article google scholar tumbar, t. et al. science 303, 359–363 (2004).cas article google scholar liu, n. et al. nature 568, 344–350 (2019).cas article google scholar barrandon, y. & green, h. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 84, 2302–2306 (1987).cas article google scholar giangreco, a., qin, m., pintar, j. e. & watt, f. m. aging cell 7, 250–259 (2008).cas article google scholar ichijo, r. et al. nat. aging https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00244-6 (2022).article google scholar moehring, f., mikesell, a.r., sadler, k.e., menzel, a.d. & stucky, c.l. preprint at biorxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.19.211086 (2020).holt, j. r. et al. elife 10, e65415 (2021).cas article google scholar herrera, j., henke, c. a. & bitterman, p. b. j. clin. invest. 128, 45–53 (2018).article google scholar chu, s. y. et al. nat. commun. 10, 1524 (2019).article google scholar harn, h. i. et al. nat. commun. 12, 2595 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesthe ronald o. perelman department of dermatology, new york university, school of medicine, new york, ny, usachae ho lim & mayumi itodepartment of cell biology, new york university, school of medicine, new york, ny, usachae ho lim & mayumi itoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to chae ho lim or mayumi ito.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionslim, c.h., ito, m. niche stiffness regulates stem cell aging. nat aging 2, 568–569 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00259-zdownload citationpublished: 15 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00259-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 