muscle function decreases with age, and there are few preventative treatments. zhang et al. find that different cell types in aging muscle express different senescence markers, giving insight into the complexity of senescence biology. they also show that aspects of muscle aging can be improved with senotherapeutic intervention.you have full access to this article via your institution.sarcopenia is characterized by an age-related loss of muscle mass and strength that is increasingly prevalent in the older adult (over 60s) population1. such a decrease in muscle function can have serious consequences, contributing to disability, frailty and even mortality. however, the causes of this decline remain unclear. while many triggers have been implicated, one possible contributing factor is cellular senescence. senescence is a form of irreversible cell cycle arrest, caused by various stimuli such as dna damage, inflammation and cellular aging2. previous studies have linked senescence with muscle aging, particularly in muscle stem cells, where an age-associated increase in the senescence mediator p16 inhibits muscle regeneration3,4. zhang et al. set out to investigate this potential contribution of senescence to muscle aging in greater detail5. they identified and characterized two populations of senescent cells in muscles from old mice, the features of which were conserved in humans, and found that aspects of muscle aging can be improved by a senotherapeutic intervention.in senescence, cells not only exit the cell cycle permanently by expressing key cell cycle inhibitor genes (among which p16 and p21 are the most critical), but also undergo broad phenotypic changes including altered morphology and persistent dna damage signaling. in addition, senescent cells secrete a complex cocktail of factors, known collectively as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp), which allows these cells to interact extensively with their surroundings. however, despite multiple markers of senescence being known, none alone is a reliable indicator of senescence, and therefore it is necessary to assess multiple markers. during recent years, mounting evidence has shown that senescence is causative in aging and age-related disease2,4. this has led to a major effort to identify drugs that can kill or interfere with senescent cells (senolytics or senomorphics, respectively), yielding several agents that have shown promising results in mice, some of which have entered into clinical trials2,6,7.in this new study, the authors first validated their model, demonstrating functional decline of the aging muscle, including decreased mass, fiber area and strength. interestingly, they also observed an increase in centrally nucleated fibers — a feature present in several myopathies — in aged muscle8. further detailed investigation confirmed the upregulation of many senescence markers in old muscles, including dna damage, elevated p16 and p21 expression, and sasp markers. notably, they found that many of these features were conserved in human tissues, further strengthening the translational implications and reliably establishing that senescence burden increases in aging muscle, paralleling functional decline.a key question was to determine which cell types were undergoing senescence. muscle is composed of muscle fibers, which are postmitotic multinucleated cells, and a mixture of mononuclear cells with proliferative capacity, including endothelial cells, satellite cells, fibroadipogenic precursors (faps) and others. to encompass all, the authors had to take different approaches to studying mononuclear cells and polynuclear fibers. first, they used single-cell rna sequencing of the mononuclear cells in the muscle of both young and old mice, which showed an age-associated increase in p16-expressing macrophages and endothelial cells. however, the most striking change was in faps, with old animals exhibiting a significant increase in p16-positive faps. this was further validated by fap isolation, revealing elevated levels of p16 and multiple cellular markers of senescence in a subpopulation of these cells. this picture is in good accord with the many studies of aged tissues that demonstrate an increase in p16-expressing cells in a variety of cell types during aging2,4,9.surprisingly, however, this approach did not uncover the source of increased p21 expression seen at the bulk level. to tackle this, the authors went back to the polynuclear myofibers, finding that p21 protein and rna levels were substantially increased in these during aging. next, they isolated single myofibers, assessed p21 expression by quantitative pcr and identified a subpopulation of p21-high myofibers in the old muscle. rna sequencing of selected muscle fibers revealed that aged fibers with elevated p21 also exhibited a distinct, yet not complete, sasp profile, but one that, unexpectedly, did not express p16. in other words, they uncovered a complex picture of senescence in aging muscle, revealing two distinct populations of senescent cells with different transcriptional profiles (fig. 1). these data are in agreement with other recent studies10,11, all pointing to an important question in the field: the heterogeneity of the senescence program in aging and diseased states.left, young mice; middle, old mice; right, old mice following treatment with dasatinib and quercetin (dq). old mice have an increase in features of senescence and aging, decreased muscle function, p21high myocytes, p16+ faps and an increase in centrally located nuclei. treatment with dq reduces some of these age-associated features and improves muscle function. sc, senescent cell.one question arising from this work is why faps are the predominant cell type that expresses p16. faps are mesenchymal progenitor cells that can differentiate into adipocytes, fibroblasts or osteocytes, playing key roles in muscle regeneration12. one question not answered in the current study is whether the aged faps have impaired differentiation capacity. interestingly, a recent study found that faps undergo a transient senescence response that is beneficial for muscle regeneration after exercise13. does this suggest that aging involves chronic activation of what should be a transient beneficial response? it will be of great interest to see whether the age-associated fap senescence profile resembles that of the transient response in young animals upon injury or if it has acquired a distinct age-associated profile. future studies with cell-type-specific ablation of the individual senescence genes will be informative.finally, a major remaining question in the study was whether the senescent cells were actually contributing to the age-related decline in muscle function. the authors addressed this by treating the mice with dasatinib and quercetin (dq), a senotherapeutic combination of drugs that has been used to target senescent cells in other settings7. although dq in this study led to an improvement in multiple features of muscle aging (fig. 1), it also raised further questions. most strikingly, the increase in centrally nucleated muscle fibers in aged muscle was attenuated by dq treatment, and this was accompanied by a modest increase in muscle performance, supporting some mechanistic involvement of senescence in skeletal muscle aging. however, the overall effect of the senolytic was small with regards to reductions in the main senescence markers p16 and p21, although there was a clear trend toward decreased expression. the authors went on to demonstrate that senomorphic therapy resulted in a significant reduction in the expression of p21 variant 2 (an isoform recently linked to aging and cellular senescence14) and elements of the p53 signaling pathway (a major senescence effector), which supports a partial inhibition of senescent cell burden in skeletal muscle, particularly in p21-positive muscle fibers.the idea of targeting senescent cells for therapeutic purposes either by killing them (senolysis) or by changing their properties (senomodulation) has received great attention recently2,6. multiple senolytic compounds have emerged, showing different potencies based on the targeted cell type and the method of senescence induction. dq previously showed senolytic activity in preadipocytes and endothelial cells in vitro; however, the combination’s effect on faps and myocytes in the current study remains unknown. since there are several instances in which dq does not kill senescent cells, it will be important to determine whether dq improves muscle function by killing senescent cells or changing their transcriptional profile — an important question applicable to all senotherapeutic studies6.another important consideration addressed by the authors' approach is the adjustment of the experimental protocol to the reality of their model. by separating the tissue into mononuclear cells and myofibers, they were able to reliably cover all relevant cell types in the muscle. however, this raises a general question of whether current single-cell rna sequencing protocols are optimized to analyze senescent cells in tissues. in vitro, senescent cells have different cell morphology and size, a remodeled cytoskeleton and altered cell membrane properties. little is known about these characteristics in senescent cells in vivo, but, if present, these properties could negatively affect the numbers of cells isolated using standard protocols. this limitation could be addressed using single-nucleus rna sequencing. such an approach applied to skeletal muscle was recently reported in a preprint, showing an increase in abundance of p21-positive skeletal muscle nuclei in samples from older patients, which is in accordance with this study15. interestingly, sequencing of single nuclei did not detect an increase in p16-positive faps, which could be a matter of sensitivity, owing to generally low abundance of this transcript, or differences in nuclear versus cytoplasmic expression. these findings highlight ongoing challenges for characterizing senescent cells from tissues.taken together, this work advances our knowledge of muscle aging, further highlighting how senescence in vivo may be more heterogenous than initially thought. it underlines important questions in the field, such as how exactly senescence contributes to aging and the mechanism of action of senotherapeutics. as such, it takes us a step closer to understanding the complexity of senescence, and provides important proof-of-concept results that decreased muscle function during aging might be amenable to senotherapy-induced improvement.cruz-jentoft, a. j. & sayer, a. a. lancet 393, 2636–2646 (2019).article google scholar di micco, r., krizhanovsky, v., baker, d. & d’adda di fagagna, f. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 22, 75–95 (2021).article google scholar sousa-victor, p. et al. nature 506, 316–321 (2014).cas article google scholar baker, d. j. et al. nature 530, 184–189 (2016).cas article google scholar zhang, x. et al. nat. aging https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00250-8 (2022).childs, b. g. et al. nat. rev. drug discov. 16, 718–735 (2017).cas article google scholar xu, m. et al. nat. med. 24, 1246–1256 (2018).cas article google scholar jungbluth, h., wallgren-pettersson, c. & laporte, j. orphanet j. rare dis. 3, 26 (2008).liu, j. y. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 116, 2603–2611 (2019).cas article google scholar wang, b. et al. nat. aging 1, 962–973 (2021).article google scholar ritschka, b. et al. genes dev. 34, 489–494 (2020).cas article google scholar collins, b. c. & kardon, g. development 148, dev199861 (2021).saito, y., chikenji, t. s., matsumura, t., nakano, m. & fujimiya, m. nat. commun. 11, 889 (2020).lópez-domínguez, j. a. et al. aging (albany ny) 13, 13380–13392 (2021).article google scholar perez, k. et al. preprint at medrxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.21250336 (2021).download referenceswork in the keyes lab was supported in part by grants from la fondation pour la recherche medicale (frm) (aje20160635985), fondation arc pour la recherche sur le cancer (pja20181208104), la fondation schlumberger pour l’education et la recherche (fser 19 (year 2018)/frm), and agence nationale de la recherche (anr) (anr-19-ce13-0023-03).igbmc, institut de génétique et de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire, illkirch, francematej durik & william m. keyescnrs, umr 7104, illkirch, francematej durik & william m. keyesinserm, umr-s 1258, illkirch, francematej durik & william m. keyesuniversité de strasbourg, igbmc umr 7104, umr-s 1258, illkirch, francematej durik & william m. keyesyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to william m. keyes.m.d. owns shares in unity biotechnology. w.m.k. declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdurik, m., keyes, w.m. senescence diversity in muscle aging. nat aging 2, 570–572 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00255-3download citationpublished: 15 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43587-022-00255-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 