sub-molecular spectroscopy enables the real-space study of incoherent and coherent electronic energy transfer in artificial molecular donor–acceptor systems and their dependence on the molecular arrangement.you have full access to this article via your institution.electronic energy transfer is important in life science as well as technology, for light-harvesting in photosynthesis and energy conversion in molecular semiconductors. in particular, the energy transfer between photoexcited chromophores has been attracting widespread attention because it relates to many chemical and biological phenomena. there exist two distinct energy transfer mechanisms, which depend on the distance and arrangement between the chromophores. yet, direct diagnosis on this dependency is usually hindered by the lack of single-molecule sensitivity and resolution in optical spectroscopy.now, writing in nature nanotechnology, fan-fang kong, xiao-jun tian and colleagues report1 a real-space study of incoherent and coherent electronic energy transfer in artificial donor–acceptor systems using a low-temperature optical scanning tunnelling microscope (stm). they combine molecular manipulation to build the model systems at will with sub-molecular electroluminescence to visualize spectroscopically the electronic energy transfer in real space.a molecular dimer consisting of a donor and an acceptor is the simplest model system to explore the microscopic mechanism underlying the electronic energy transfer. the transfer efficiency depends on the interaction (v) between the molecules and the dissipation of excited states ( γ) ref. 2. the interaction strength is determined by the relative positions and orientation of the molecules, whereas the dissipation depends on how the system couples to the local environment. one mechanism describing energy transfer between pigment molecules through non-radiative dipole–dipole coupling is the förster resonance energy transfer. this incoherent electronic energy transfer mechanism is operative when the intermolecular interaction is relatively weak (v<γ). the initially excited electronic state in the donor hops to the acceptor, with the eigenstates being well localized at the respective molecule. when the intermolecular dipole–dipole coupling is stronger than the dissipation (v>γ), coherent energy transfer becomes operative. in this case, the excited state is delocalized over the dimer, and the excitation energy can be transferred back and forth between donor and acceptor. these different mechanisms critically affect the efficiency of energy transfer. the strong entanglement between the chromophores in the coherent mechanism will lead to optical properties beyond the linear sum of the individual components. in order to gain an in-depth understanding, great effort has been devoted to quantify the role of quantum coherence in the energy transfer and to elucidate the microscopic mechanism — whether quantum coherence really contributes to the overall photochemical process in complex molecular systems.nonlinear spectroscopy is a powerful way to investigate energy transfer in molecular systems because it can provide microscopic insights into complex coupling between electronic and structural degrees of freedom and its time evolution. however, molecular spectroscopy using light does not ‘see’ the individual molecules and its local arrangement. as the optical properties of coupled chromophores are strongly influenced by their number, distance, arrangement, orientation and local environment, a complete understanding of electronic energy transfer requires detailed information on all these parameters.the recent advances in optical stm have enabled individual molecules to be seen, and to perform sub-molecular spectroscopy3,4,5. this technique can directly observe electronic energy transfer between molecules6,7, whereby the molecular structure, the distance between molecules, their relative orientations and the local environment can be accurately determined and even controlled.figure 1 depicts the experimental approach used by kong et al. the researchers prepared a well-defined model system consisting of two phthalocyanine molecules with different central metal atoms, namely platinum and zinc. the two molecules act as donor (d) and acceptor (a), respectively. the molecules are adsorbed onto an ultrathin salt film on a silver crystal. the salt serves as an electronic decoupling layer to minimize damping of the electronically excited states of the molecules (γa/d).a, the single-molecule luminescence is excited by a tunnelling electron (e–) with a bias voltage (vbias). the localized surface plasmon (lsp) in the junction creates a highly confined electromagnetic field and yields the sensitivity necessary to perform sub-molecular spectroscopy. the intermolecular interaction (v) is tunable by manipulating the molecules, and the damping rate (γa/d) of the excited states is determined by the molecule‒metal interaction. the salt (nacl) film serves as an electronic decoupling layer. b, emission peaks intrinsic to each molecule (ωd/a) appear in the incoherent regime (v<γa/d). c, new emission peaks (ωdimer) emerge in the coherent regime (v>γa/d) due to the superposition of the excitonic eigenstates.by means of scanning tunnelling luminescence, the researchers then perform spectroscopic characterisation with sub-molecular resolution, in which the excited states created by the tunnelling electron radiatively decay and emit photons8. the use of a silver tip and substrate, which can sustain strongly confined plasmonic fields in the junction, yields exceptional sensitivity. the team recorded the electroluminescence spectra of the artificial dimer while changing the distance between the donor and acceptor with sub-nanometre precision using single-molecule manipulation. at larger distances, the förster resonant energy transfer is operative and results in a one-way transfer of the excitation energy from the donor to the acceptor. this incoherent energy transfer leads to the simultaneous appearance of emission peaks at the intrinsic frequency of each molecule (ωd, ωa), but only when the donor (platinum phthalocyanine) is excited. as expected, the transfer efficiency is inversely proportional to the sixth power of the distance between the molecules.when the intermolecular distance decreases and the donor and acceptor are very close, the system enters a coherent regime with a two-way transfer; the energy is transferred back and forth between the molecules and new emission peaks with different frequencies (ωdimer and ω*dimer) appear. the team observes strong emission of ωdimer and its spatial distribution on both molecules, whereas the electronic states, that is, the molecular orbitals of the two molecules, are unchanged compared with the isolated monomers. importantly, the emission occurs from the dimer even if the acceptor is excited. furthermore, the team assesses the electronic energy transfer rate between the incoherent and coherent channels by building a molecular trimer such that both pathways coexist. this experiment demonstrates that the coherent energy transfer is about three times as efficient as the incoherent one.an important next step would be the integration of ultrafast time resolution in optical stm for a direct observation of phase coherence in the electronic energy transfer through a measurement of the time correlation between different emission lines. based on the observed excitonic splitting and spectral linewidths of the coherently coupled dimer, the team estimates the dephasing time to be about 70 fs. the combination of nonlinear optics with sub-molecular spectroscopy will enable a long-sought-after capability for physical chemists — the real-time and real-space observation of energy transfer dynamics in molecular systems. recent advances in ultrafast stm have shown prospects for the direct observation of coherent vibrational and electronic dynamics in single molecules9,10,11. these techniques may make it possible to shoot movies of photochemical processes; we could watch how quantum dynamics evolves.kong, f.-f. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01142-z (2022).article google scholar chenu, a. & scholes, g. d. annu. rev. phys. chem. 66, 69–96 (2015).cas article google scholar zhang, y. et al. nature 531, 623–627 (2016).cas article google scholar yang, b. et al. nat. photon. 14, 693–699 (2020).cas article google scholar imada, h. et al. science 373, 95–98 (2021).cas article google scholar imada, h. et al. nature 538, 364–367 (2016).cas article google scholar cao, s. et al. nat. chem. 13, 766–770 (2021).cas article google scholar miwa, k. et al. nano lett. 19, 2803–2811 (2019).cas article google scholar cocker, t. l. et al. nature 539, 263–267 (2016).article google scholar li, s., chen, s., li, j., wu, r. & ho, w. phys. rev. lett. 119, 176002 (2017).article google scholar garg, m. et al. nat. photon. 16, 196–202 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesinstitute for molecular science, national institutes of natural sciences, myodaiji, okazaki, japantakashi kumagaithe graduate university for advanced studies, sokendai, okazaki, japantakashi kumagaiyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to takashi kumagai.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionskumagai, t. sub-molecular diagnostics of coherent energy transfer. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 674–675 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01171-8download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01171-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 