shrubs act as thermal bridges to conduct heat through the tundra snowpack, fostering heat loss from the ground in winter and heat gain in the spring.you have full access to this article via your institution.permafrost stores large quantities of organic carbon that under a warming climate are vulnerable to decomposition and release to the atmosphere as greenhouse gasses1. widespread permafrost thawing therefore represents a potentially large positive feedback to global climate change, mediated by complex interactions between vegetation, snow, and soil2. writing in nature geoscience, domine et al.3 combine field observations with snowpack modelling to find that the stems of shrubs alter ground temperature in winter by conducting heat through the snowpack, from the soil to the colder atmosphere.the variation of permafrost soil temperature in response to climate change is strongly related to the heterogeneity of soils and vegetation across arctic landscapes4. these arctic ecosystems generate complex interactions between air and permafrost temperatures, which are compounded by the secondary impacts of climate change. with warming, shrubs are encroaching into arctic regions that were previously dominated by grass-like plants. this ecosystem change alters the land surface energy balance and impacts permafrost thaw. relative to the grass-dominated ecosystems they replace, shrubs cool permafrost soils in summer through canopy shading and soil moisture utilization5. however, in winter, shrub canopies trap blowing snow, leading to deeper and less dense snowpacks, which minimizes heat loss to the colder atmosphere and results in soil warming relative to shrub-free tundra6. at annual and longer timescales, shrub encroachment has a net warming effect on soils, largely because the snow-covered season lasts upwards of nine months.domine and colleagues measured snow depth and density in grass- and shrub-dominated tundra in the canadian high arctic to examine relationships between snowpack properties and ground temperatures. snow depths were similar at both sites at approximately 0.4 m, meaning that the shrubs affected snow density, but not depth. as anticipated, mid-winter ground temperatures were warmer at the shrub tundra site. however, the magnitude of the temperature differences was less than expected given the higher thermal insulation of the snowpack under shrub protection. soil thermal conductivity at both sites was similar, which suggested another mechanism was responsible for the apparent discrepancy.ground temperature dynamics in grass-dominated tundra were accurately predicted by a snowpack energy balance model, parameterized with field observations; shrub tundra dynamics were not. however, when thermal bridging — the conduction of heat by the stems of shrubs — was incorporated into the model, ground temperature predictions at the shrub tundra site also agreed well with observations. domine et al. therefore demonstrate that shrub stems conduct heat from the soil to the atmosphere in winter, cooling the ground and reducing the potential temperature difference between the original grass-dominated system and the encroaching shrub ecosystem.in addition to confirming that in winter shrub stems cool the ground by conducting heat from the soil to the atmosphere, simulation results revealed a reverse effect in spring. in april and may, before snowmelt and as air temperatures exceeded ground temperatures, the process reversed and the shrubs conducted heat into the soil, resulting in a net warming effect on ground temperatures. the conductive effects of shrubs also helped to explain diurnal patterns in ground temperatures. across the study period, the net effect of shrub heat conduction amounted to approximately 1 °c of relative cooling in winter, which partially offset the warming effect of a more insulative snowpack.ground temperatures in the non-growing season are increasingly recognized as important drivers of permafrost stability2 and the net annual ecosystem carbon balance7. even when soils are frozen, microbial respiration rates and associated carbon dioxide emissions are non-negligible and increase exponentially with temperature7. as such, widespread winter ground temperature changes of even a few degrees will impact the carbon cycle and climate. but, the relative impacts of thermal bridging on ground temperatures may vary with shrub density, canopy architecture, rooting depth, or soil properties. in addition to these potential differences, taller shrub canopies that protrude above the snowpack also lower albedo (fig. 1), which could enhance summer thawing via longer snow-free seasons8.as climate warms, shrubs are encroaching into previously grass-dominated arctic ecosystems. these ecosystem changes also alter the thermal regime and stability of permafrost. domine et al.3 integrate observations and modelling from the canadian high arctic to show that shrub stems conduct heat. in the winter, the stems transfer warmth from the soil to the colder atmosphere, which partially offsets the positive effects shrubs have on snowpack thermal insulation. the magnitude of this offset likely varies with shrub canopy architecture and climatic conditions. credit: n. rutter, northumbria university.understanding the extent to which thermal bridging may offset snow trapping is necessary to accurately quantify the effects of shrub expansion on winter carbon dioxide emissions. while domine et al.3 have demonstrated conductive heat transfer in shrub stems, the regional importance of this process for permafrost stability and carbon emissions remains unclear. quantifying the magnitude of thermal bridging by shrubs on relative ground temperatures across a range of ecoclimatic conditions is necessary to determine whether this process will appreciably affect winter carbon dioxide emissions across the arctic.schuur, e. a. g. et al. nature 520, 171–179 (2015).article google scholar smith, s. l., o’neill, h. b., isaksen, k., noetzli, j. & romanovsky, v. e. nat. rev. earth environ. 3, 10–23 (2022).article google scholar domine, f. et al. nat. geosci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00979-2 (2022).article google scholar grünberg, i., wilcox, e. j., zwieback, s., marsh, p. & boike, j. biogeosciences 17, 4261–4279 (2020).article google scholar blok, d. et al. glob. change biol. 16, 1296–1305 (2010).article google scholar myers-smith, i. h. & hik, d. s. ecol. evol. 3, 3683–3700 (2013).article google scholar natali, s. m. et al. nat. clim. change 9, 852–857 (2019).article google scholar wilcox, e. j. et al. arct. sci. 5, 202–217 (2019).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of geography, colgate university, hamilton, ny, usamichael m. lorantyyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to michael m. loranty.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsloranty, m.m. thermal bridging by arctic shrubs. nat. geosci. 15, 515–516 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00977-4download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00977-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 