two new papers describe the successful purification of the partially intact human native red blood cell band 3 multiprotein membrane complexes, providing information that the authors then use to capture the structures and interactions of multiple erythrocyte proteins using high-resolution cryo-em.you have full access to this article via your institution.sometimes, for scientists, ground-breaking papers are like buses: after one waits patiently for a long time for a breakthrough, they then arrive in multiples at the same time. in this issue of nature structural biology, we have not one but two manuscripts, by vallese et al.1 and xia et al.2, containing unprecedented structural detail regarding a key red blood cell (rbc) membrane multiprotein complex3.notably, across both papers we are presented with eight new erythroid protein structures — band 3, glycophorin a (gpa), the rhesus proteins rhag and rhce, aquaporin-1, protein 4.2, ankyrin and glycophorin b (gpb) — in various associated native states1,2. crucially, not only do these new structures enhance our current understanding of rbc structure and function in health and disease, but they also provide a broader interest due to the occurrence of similar types of transporter–cytoskeleton associations that are replicated in other cells of the body by isoforms of the same protein families.the rbc is the most abundant cell type in the body, and the anion exchanger known as band 3 (or as anion exchanger 1, ae1) is the protein most highly expressed within its membrane. in the rbc, many of the key membrane proteins such as band 3 are found in multiprotein complexes that are corralled and tethered via adaptor proteins to the underlying spectrin-based cytoskeleton4. this ensures that key proteins are evenly distributed around the rbc surface for efficient gas exchange, and these interactions are essential to provide stability to the membrane. the two most abundant multiprotein complexes in the rbc membrane are the band 3–ankyrin multiprotein complex3 and the 4.1r junctional multiprotein complex5. the correct delivery and assembly of these multiprotein complexes are crucial for imparting the recognizable biconcave structure of the rbc. mutations affecting ankyrin or band 3, for example, can disrupt these associations and cause hereditary spherocytosis6 or southeast asian ovalocytosis7. mutations of band 3 or the associated protein rhag can cause hereditary stomatocytosis due to cation leaks8.over many years, researchers have made considerable progress in improving our understanding of the molecular structure and assembly of these erythrocyte membrane complexes during erythropoiesis. there have been crystal structures, for example of the band 3 n-terminal domain9 and membrane domain;10 structures predicted through homology modelling, such as those of rhesus proteins11 and protein 4.2;12 and even attempts at modeling the structure of the whole complex13. the interactions within these complexes have been elucidated through careful studies on rbcs of individuals with genetic mutations that result in specific erythroid protein deficiencies, and through painstaking biochemical studies from numerous research groups around the world. although we previously had good information about how these proteins interact and associate, through these two landmark papers we can now finally visualize, in unprecedented detail, the individual associations and proteins found in the human erythrocyte band 3 ankyrin multiprotein complex in situ.in both papers, we are treated to the first full structures of native band 3. xia et al.3 provide a 2.8-å cryo-em structure of band 3 in the outward-facing confirmation, and this structure fills in the gaps for previously unresolved regions of band 3 in the previously reported crystal structure10 (fig. 1). these new structures of band 3 will be a boon for computational scientists and modelers to help further explore how the anion-exchanger family proteins transport their substrates. unexpectedly, cryo-em structural studies show that the band 3 chaperone protein gpa associates with band 3 in the plasma membrane as a monomer, rather than the expected dimer. the gpa monomer associates closely with a gpa monomer on a separate band 3 dimer, which may hint at how these complexes assemble or maintain integrity if connectivity to the cytoskeleton is lost.band 3a and band 3b indicate individual band 3 monomers. the cytosolic domain of band 3 is labelled ‘cdb3’ and the membrane domain of band 3 is labelled ‘mdb3’. adapted from xia et al.2, springer nature.both papers describe the anticipated associations of dimeric band 3 with ankyrin, but with some differences. xia et al.2 describe a dimer of band 3–gpa associated with both protein 4.2 and ankyrin repeat region 6–13 of ankyrin, and also another dimer of band 3–gpa at ankyrin repeat region 17–203. vallese et al.1 identify an additional associated dimer of band 3 and gpa at ankyrin repeat region 21–24, suggesting that each ankyrin can bind three separate dimers rather than the expected two (fig. 2). the band 3 dimer (labeled ‘band 3-i’ in fig. 2) associated with the n terminus of the ankyrin repeat region is indirectly associated via protein 4.2 in the vallese et al. complex structure. whether these differences are due to inherent flexibility of the binding associations at the ankyrin n terminus that facilitates multiple conformations and complexes, or were produced as an artifact of the isolation method, will need to be determined. importantly, though, in support of the former possibility, vallese et al. complement their cryo-em structures by providing sub-tomogram averages of particles in vesicles generated by extrusion of native erythrocyte membrane.a, image shows band 3 ankyrin complex containing three band 3 dimers (labeled band 3-i, band 3-ii and band 3-iii), glycophorin a, glycophorin b, a rhag–rhce heterotrimer, aquaporin-1, protein 4.2 and ankyrin. b, image shows band 3 dimer labeled band 3-i, glycophorin a, the rh complex, aquaporin-1, ankyrin and protein 4.2. adapted from vallese et al.1, springer nature.we are also provided with the first full-length native structures for the associated adaptor proteins ankyrin and protein 4.2, solidifying pre-existing assumptions based on partial structures or homology models. vallese et al.1 go a step further, providing not only the band 3, ankyrin and protein 4.2 structures, but also full structures for an associated heterotrimer of rhag and rhce (comprising a ratio of 2:1 rhag to rhce), gpb and also aquaporin-1. with the direct native structural information for rhce, the authors tantalizingly observe evidence of a channel, suggesting that it may be a membrane transporter. these structures also show the interactions between rhag, gpb and band 3, rhce and aquaporin-1, and the interactions of these proteins with ankyrin and protein 4.2. using these structures, vallese et al.1 propose that the preassembly of the rhag–rhce, band 3 and gpb subcomplex could facilitate the recruitment of ankyrin to the overall multiprotein complex by displacement of the ankyrin autoinhibition motif that would otherwise preclude complex assembly.intriguingly, no density was detected for rhd within the rh heterotrimer structure solved by vallese et al.1, even though rhd-positive blood was used. this may be explained simply by heterogeneity within the rhag–rh complex, with only rhce-containing multiprotein complexes then being resolved, for unknown reasons. however, deficiency of rhce in humans results in structural abnormalities in the rbc membrane that are not replicated in mice. this is because in mice a proportion of rh proteins are associated with the 4.1 junctional multiprotein complex5. therefore, another explanation is that rhd either is simply not associated with the band 3 ankyrin complex or, alternatively, is associated with the 4.1r junctional complex as in mice5. exploration of prospective subcomplexes of rhag with rhce and rhd should be explored further in future studies on the human junctional complex.although these new structures represent a real quantum leap in our depth of understanding of the proteins and interactions within this important complex, there remains more work to be done. there are still proteins that are known to associate with the band 3 complex but are absent, perhaps because they are more loosely associated or are found in other complexes that were not isolated. these missing proteins, cd47 and lw (icam4), comprise the remaining proteins of the rhesus subcomplex. structural information regarding the native complex environment of the marker of self cd47 remains elusive, notwithstanding its established dependencies upon the protein 4.2 and rhce proteins resolved by vallese et al.1.in summary, the abundant erythroid protein structures reported by vallese et al.1 and xia et al.2 combined provide an unprecedented structural understanding of a vital erythrocyte multiprotein complex that is important for gas exchange and imparts membrane flexibility in humans. these papers provide confirmation for previous studies, fill in the gaps and provide finer details about the individual protein structures enhancing the current depth of understanding of how these important proteins likely interact with one another in the rbc membrane.these data will eventually lead to an improved mechanistic understanding of how the specialized membrane of the rbc is built and also how the red cell adapts in the different environments to which it is exposed as it traverses the circulation. the possibility that the approaches used here to purify erythroid membrane complexes could be applied in future studies to study rare patients’ rbcs known to lack specific protein components due to genetic mutations is exciting. this would provide further understanding of how the complexes are assembled and elucidate how the cell adapts to specific protein deficiencies in human disease. finally, we know that rbcs change the associations within the complexes to alter the cell shape or to enable the cell to deform, and that phosphorylation can impart some of these changes. therefore, exploration of the structures obtained from rbcs exposed to different experimental conditions, such as during oxygenation/deoxygenation or after induction of phosphorylation, will be enormously informative.vallese, f. et al. nat. struct. mol. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00792-w (2022).article google scholar xia, x., liu, s. & hong zhou, z. nat. struct. mol. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00779-7 (2022).article pubmed google scholar bruce, l. j. et al. blood 101, 4180–4188 (2003).cas article google scholar van den akker, e., satchwell, t. j., williamson, r. c. & toye, a. m. blood cells molec. dis. 45, 1–8 (2010).article google scholar salomao, m. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 105, 8026–8031 (2008).cas article google scholar perrotta, s., gallagher, p. g. & mohandas, n. lancet 372, 1411–1426 (2008).cas article google scholar schofield, a. e., reardon, d. m. & tanner, m. j. a. nature 355, 836–838 (1992).cas article google scholar bruce, l. j. blood cells molec. dis. 42, 216–222 (2009).cas article google scholar zhang, d., kiyatkin, a., bolin, j. t. & low, p. s. blood 96, 2925–2933 (2000).cas article google scholar arakawa, t. et al. science 350, 680–684 (2015).cas article google scholar gruswitz, f. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 107, 9638–9643 (2010).cas article google scholar toye, a. m. et al. blood 105, 4088–4095 (2005).cas article google scholar mankelow, t. j., satchwell, t. j. & burton, n. m. blood cells molec. dis. 49, 1–10 (2012).cas article google scholar download referencesthe author thanks h. zhou and o. clarke for their generation of figs. 1 and 2, respectively, and t. satchwell for critical reading of this article.university of bristol, biomedical sciences building, school of biochemistry, bristol, ukashley m. toyebristol institute of transfusion sciences, nhs blood and transplant, filton, bristol, ukashley m. toyeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ashley m. toye.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionstoye, a.m. the band 3–ankyrin multiprotein complex comes in from the cold. nat struct mol biol 29, 621–623 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00789-5download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00789-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 