almost 60% of adults and nearly one-third of children in europe are overweight or obese (see go.nature.com/3bsijrd). beyond lifestyle interventions, effective therapies to reduce obesity mostly involve surgery, so new, less-invasive strategies are required. a type of fat known as brown adipose tissue (bat) is currently the subject of interest as a target for weight-loss intervention, because it burns calories by releasing stored energy in organelles called mitochondria and converting it to heat — a process called thermogenesis1,2. evidence indicates that the activity of bat is associated with reduced weight and improved metabolic health1. writing in nature, niemann et al.3 outline a previously unknown regulatory pathway governing the activity of bat that could potentially be targeted for therapeutic weight loss. read the paper: apoptotic brown adipocytes enhance energy expenditure via extracellular inosinethe authors first housed mice at thermoneutral temperatures (the ambient temperatures at which body temperature can be maintained without the need to expend energy). this inactivates fat cells in bat called brown adipocytes and triggers their death through a process known as apoptosis. niemann and colleagues observed that apoptosis led to the formation and activation of nearby brown adipocytes; these could originate from a different type of fat cell called a white adipocyte, or from precursors of brown and white adipocytes. the new brown adipocytes therefore effectively replace the dying population.niemann et al. next asked what signals are being released from the dying bat to cause this effect. analysis of the dying cells revealed that, among more than 300 metabolic products released during apoptosis, specific molecules called purines were the most abundant. the researchers tested the ability of three purines to trigger the activation of bat and identified one, inosine, as the probable major effector.the authors found that inosine acts by binding to either of two purine receptor proteins — a2a and a2b — on the surface of the neighouring cells. this activates a signalling pathway known as the pka–camp cascade, which induces brown adipocyte formation and activation. the researchers also demonstrated that administering inosine to obese mice increased bat activity and overall energy expenditure, and even induced weight loss. evidence that overnight fasting could extend healthy lifespanto further dissect this pathway, niemann and colleagues investigated how extra-cellular inosine concentration is regulated by transporter proteins that shuttle inosine across the cell membrane into existing brown adipocytes. they showed that the protein ent1 is a prominent regulator of inosine uptake. they therefore genetically engineered mice to lack ent1 in adipocytes, and found that the animals showed enhanced extracellular inosine levels, greater bat activation and higher overall energy expenditure compared with control animals. accordingly, administration of a drug called dipyridamole, which inhibits ent1, enhanced bat activity and energy expenditure in wild-type mice. most importantly, a genetic analysis in humans indicated that a particular variant of ent1 (ile216thr) is associated with lower weight and better metabolic health than is seen in people who do not have this variant.together, the results indicate that the shuttling of inosine into cells by ent1 limits the pool of extracellular inosine available to brown adipocytes, maintaining the overall number of thermogenic adipocytes. when the cells die, the release of inosine acts as a ‘replace me’ signal, causing increased formation and activation of brown adipocytes, and a concomitant increase in energy expenditure (fig. 1).figure 1 | a regulatory pathway in brown adipose tissue (bat). brown fat cells convert energy to heat. niemann et al.3 provide evidence that this process, known as thermogenesis, is regulated by the molecule inosine. levels of extracellular inosine are maintained in normal bat by the protein ent1, which transports inosine into brown fat cells. but if the cells die through apoptosis — as occurs when they are moved from cold to warm conditions — the inosine is released. it binds to a2a and a2b receptor proteins on neighbouring cells, triggering the formation of new brown fat cells (not shown) and activating thermogenesis, thus increasing energy expenditure.until now, little has been known about the maintenance of thermogenic adipose tissue and regulation of its overall abundance under normal conditions, or its contribution to energy metabolism. removal of brown adipose tissue in mice has been shown4 to trigger the formation of thermogenic adipocytes in other parts of the body, suggesting that the organism can indeed control the overall number of these cells. inosine might be one signal that mediates this brown adipocyte formation in response to environmental factors.given the seriousness of the obesity pandemic, it is essential to discover new strategies to induce weight loss. one potential branch of therapies involves small gut molecules such as glp1, which drive weight loss mainly by restricting energy intake5. but a concern is that this restriction could be compensated for by a reduction in overall energy homeo-stasis. in this context, the action of molecules that modulate bat function have gained prominence. indeed, several molecules have already been shown to control the activity of bat6,7. now inosine enters the stage.the fact that the pathway uncovered by niemann et al. has a rapid response time (15 minutes) makes it highly versatile as a drug target. but it also means that the pathway must presumably be tightly regulated, to keep a lid on energy expenditure. the substantial expression of ent1 that the authors observed indeed suggests that inosine uptake might be crucial to maintaining energy expenditure at normal levels. the pathway could play into a person’s basal metabolic rate (the number of calories burnt performing life-sustaining functions), which varies widely between individuals8. perhaps certain mutations in the ent1 gene predispose people to have a higher basal energy expenditure. whether people with the reported ile216thr mutation derive their metabolic benefits from an increase in basal metabolic rate is a key question for future studies. why brown fat has a lot of nerveanother question is whether the effects of inosine are exclusively mediated by signalling through a2a and a2b, or partly result from intracellular changes in inosine content caused by ent1-induced uptake, where inosine could act as a precursor for the synthesis of metabolic compounds9, rather than as a signalling molecule. similarly, it should be noted that ent1 transports other compounds, too. although niemann and colleagues’ data suggest that inosine is the main regulator of bat induction, the possibility cannot be excluded that other ent1 substrates are activators of a2a and a2b.inosine might also have immune modulatory effects in bat that play into the weight-loss pathway. it has been shown to have immunosuppressive properties in several other cell types10. furthermore, niemann et al. found that ultraviolet irradiation triggers the release of inosine from endothelial cells, which line blood vessels in bat. inosine might therefore affect the microenvironment of bat in multiple ways, thereby indirectly influencing tissue function.finally, before considering how this pathway could be harnessed to treat obesity, some key concerns should be addressed. first and foremost, bat activation is driven by the sympathetic nervous system, which also increases heart rate and blood pressure, two factors linked to the risk of cardiovascular disease. in addition, a2a activation in the heart increases the basal heart rate11. furthermore, inosine is a precursor of urate, which has been implicated in the development of gout and rheumatoid arthritis — well-documented co-morbidities of obesity. mitigating these risks will be essential if inosine-mediated bat activation is to be used safely to combat obesity.