the bulk crustal porosity of the lunar highland may have been generated early in the moon’s history by basin-forming impacts and then declined exponentially. a new porosity evolution model constrains the timing and sequence of basin formation.you have full access to this article via your institution.collisions between celestial bodies were much more energetic and frequent during the first one billion years of our solar system than thereafter. large impacts on the early earth may have played an influential role in habitability and the origin of life, initiation of plate tectonics, and atmospheric evolution, yet this early impact history remains unresolved1. the moon, having experienced a similar impactor flux to the earth and without earth’s vigorous surface processes, is the best placed witness to record the early impact history, but lunar craters leave many open questions2. writing in nature geoscience, huang and colleagues3 find that the bulk crustal porosity of the lunar highland correlates with spatial densities of impact structures, suggesting that crustal porosity can be used to constrain the moon’s early impact history, even where the surface cratering record is incomplete.although the apollo missions returned samples from impact basins, information from geochemical analyses about the provenances of lunar samples and their isotopic ages contain uncertainties, and the formation ages of most lunar impact basins remain unclear4. various impact flux models for the early earth–moon system have been proposed, represented by two end-member scenarios:1,2 (1) the accretionary tail scenario in which there was a continuous and exponential decline of the impact flux of leftover planetesimals, and (2) the cataclysm bombardment scenario in which many, if not most, lunar impact basins were formed in a relatively short time period after the crystallization of the hypothesized lunar magma ocean. which of these two end member scenarios is more likely remains an active debate.geophysical observations provide, indirectly, some clues. gravity measurements by nasa’s gravity recovery and interior laboratory (grail) mission indicate that the lunar crust contains an average porosity of about 12% (ref. 5, fig. 1), and it has been recently discovered that the crustal porosity beneath older impact basins is smaller due to long term pore compaction6. thus, it can be hypothesized that porosity might be useful to deduce information about the moon’s impact history.nasa/jpl-caltech/ ipgp (panel a).a, porosity of the lunar highland crust derived from gravity data from nasa’s grail mission. warmer colours correspond to higher porosities and cooler colours correspond to lower porosities. circles mark impact basins. b, huang et al3. model the evolution of lunar highland crustal porosity by impacts, in doing so, constrain the early bombardment history of the moon. they find that many basins (black circles) formed over a short time period generating high bulk crustal porosity, and the impact flux declined thereafter due to compaction by later impacts (white circles).huang and colleagues3 now extend the investigation of crustal porosity to the entire lunar highland. they find a reverse correlation between terrane exposure ages — as represented by the spatial densities of craters larger than 20 km in diameter — and crustal porosity. they also find a positive correlation between the spatial densities of impact basins larger than 200 km in diameter and crustal porosity. huang et al. propose that the lunar highland’s bulk crustal porosity was generated by large impacts and subsequently declined progressively due to later smaller impacts and compaction from overburden pressure. the derived quantitative relationship between crustal porosity evolution and impact sizes partly reflects how the impact process affects regolith, with large impacts breaking up competent bedrocks and increase porosity and small impacts acting to close pores in mature regolith7.huang and colleagues constructed an analytical model to simulate the crustal porosity for the entire moon, assuming an initial porosity of 10% immediately after formation of the south pole–aitken basin 4.3 billion years ago. by adjusting the relative formation sequences of the modelled basins, they were able to produce a crustal porosity map for the lunar highland that is very similar to estimates based on grail observations. the preferred formation sequence of impact basins estimated from crustal porosity is generally consistent with previous studies2, with additional constraints on the formation ages of basins including nubium, humboltianum, and crisum. the findings suggest that the bulk porosity of lunar crust formed very soon after the solidification of the lunar magma ocean, and it has been decreasing ever since.the approximate match between the observed crustal porosity from grail gravity data and that modelled by huang and colleagues is impressive. such a porosity-based approach has potential applications to understanding the early impact history and crustal evolution of other inner solar system bodies. however, the porosity model of huang and colleagues does not include the physics of porosity generation and reduction processes, and crater densities predicted from grail-derived crustal porosity contain unknown contributions of overburden pressure to pore compaction. therefore, the crater densities predicted by huang et al. may be overestimates of the craters that have actually accumulated in various terrains.interestingly, reported model ages for the proposed sequence of impact basins suggest that most of the moon’s 77 impact basins formed over an interval of 200 million years, between about 4.3 to 4.1 ga, with the exception of several younger basins such as moscovinese, imbrium and orientale (fig. 1b). this interpreted impact history is akin to a cataclysm bombardment, but one that occurred earlier than the traditional lunar cataclysm scenario8. the clustered model ages, however, were predicted from the accretionary tail scenario3, which implies that the pre-4.31 ga impact flux may have been even larger — intriguing for understanding the role of large impacts in the evolution of the newborn moon and the lifetime of the lunar magma ocean9. however, the porosity model ages are dependent on the impact flux model employed.nevertheless, the work by huang and colleagues3 reveals that the moon’s crustal porosity records the impact history of the lunar surface, suggesting that geophysical observations can be an important tool in unravelling the geologic evolution of the moon.bottke, w. f. et al. annu. rev. earth planet. sci. 45, 619–647 (2017).article google scholar fassett, c. i. et al. nat. geosci. 6, 520–524 (2013).article google scholar huang, y. h. et al. nat. geosci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00969-4 (2022).article google scholar stöffler, d. et al. space sci. rev. 96, 9–54 (2001).article google scholar wieczorek, m. a. et al. science. 339, 671–675 (2013).article google scholar wahl, d. et al. j. geophys. res. planets 125, e2019je006335 (2020).article google scholar ding, c. et al. geophys. res. lett. 47, 1–9 (2020). google scholar tera, f. et al. earth planet. sci. lett. 22, 1–21 (1974).article google scholar miljković et al. nat. commun. 12, 5433 (2021).article google scholar download referencesplanetary environmental and astrobiological research laboratory, school of atmospheric sciences, sun yat-sen university, zhuhai, guangdong, chinazhiyong xiaoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to zhiyong xiao.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsxiao, z. moon’s crustal porosity records impact history. nat. geosci. 15, 512–513 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00985-4download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00985-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 