in silico cultivar selection estimates that the global potential wheat yield may be doubled. however, there remain many challenges in leveraging the yield potential into practice.you have full access to this article via your institution.global food production has increased nearly fourfold since 1961, mainly owing to increased per-unit-area yields (fig. 1). however, the yield increase for these crops for the most recent 30 years (1991–2020) has slowed, casting a shadow on whether production can continue to keep pace with population growth. further increase in farm yield can be achieved through increasing potential yield and/or by narrowing the yield gap. there have been many studies that quantify the gap between ‘farm yield’ and potential yield estimated from the best cultivars under best management practices1, but these fall short of what is needed to achieve them2,3. moreover, few studies have attempted to quantify the degree to which further increases to potential yields are possible, and global estimates have not been available to date.linear regression slopes (lrs, t ha−1 yr−1) for each 30-year period are significantly different (p < 0.0001) for each crop. data from https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home.writing in nature food, senapati et al.4 report a global estimate of the potential for further genetic yield improvements in wheat, using a process-based crop simulation model applied at 53 sites in 12 major wheat-growing environments across the globe in a range of climatic and soil conditions. they tested numerous in silico cultivars ‘developed’ by changing eight model parameters and found that the best-performing virtual cultivar outyielded current local cultivars by about 100% on average. the study also highlights the considerable variation in potential yield across environments, ranging from 9.8 to 14.8 t ha−1. the higher estimates are not surprising because such yields have been reported with current cultivars in yield contests or in commercial farms2. the good news is that the estimated potential for genetic yield improvements is greater in some low rainfall environments, where current cultivars have relatively low yields and where greater improvements are badly needed.what do the best performing virtual cultivars look like? unfortunately, the study does not describe in detail the traits that increase potential yields, but the parameters of the virtual best performers reveal some common features. the best performers are, on average, 11% or 26 days longer in growth duration than current cultivars and flag leaf area is nearly threefold that of current cultivars. longer growth duration and larger leaf size could benefit yield by increasing canopy light interception, providing opportunities for greater biomass production.these traits are both under strong genetic control and selecting cultivars for some of these traits is feasible. one concern is whether other parameters are easily modified genetically in reality. some parameters related to root water uptake and drought tolerance are difficult to measure and thus select for in breeding programmes. a second concern is that traits can appear to be advantageous when observed individually, but through their collective inter-relationships result in cultivars that are not productive even if longer duration or larger leaves are realized. the current model accounts for some inter-relationships among different traits, but there are complex trade-offs that have not been fully considered. for example, increasing the duration of crop development by 26 days would increase economic and environmental costs due to concomitant increases in water and nutrient use, and in many climates it would reduce crop rotation flexibility. larger leaves will also increase respiration, very probably increase water use and can decrease net photosynthesis if pushed too far. also, differently structured crop models may provide different estimates or traits. a recent study using multiple rice simulation models under the agricultural model intercomparison and improvement project has shown that some beneficial traits are crop-model specific and dependent on environments5, and provided a much more conservative genetic improvement potential (14–41%, depending on sites). it would be worthwhile to test different crop models to show that the longer duration and greater leaf size are commonly beneficial across environments.notable differences in the best performers’ traits between rainfed and irrigated conditions are parameters representing responses to water stress. under rainfed conditions, the best performers maintain photosynthetic activity or avoid early leaf senescence in water-limited environments better than current cultivars. these parameters, however, are rather empirical and do not represent physiological mechanisms underlying drought tolerance. as a result, it is not directly suggestive as to what genetic modifications are needed.the virtual cultivar comparisons in the work of senapati et al.4 were made using climate records from the past 30 years. however, projected changes in temperature, precipitation and atmospheric co2 concentrations, and associated increases in climate and weather extremes, are major factors that need to be considered for crop production systems6. there is also a need for climate- and site-specific breeding programmes to improve crop adaptation to climate change5.model-assisted crop ideotyping is useful for quantifying the potential genetic improvement, but there remain many challenges in leveraging the potential in practice. a preliminary attempt has begun to link modelling results with breeders’ selection or target traits5. the huge yield gap estimated in senapati et al.4 will promote more frequent communication between crop physiologists, modellers, geneticists and breeders to advance in silico breeding into practice.van ittersum, m. k. et al. field crops res. 143, 4–17 (2013).article google scholar fischer, t., byerlee, d. & edmeades, g. crop yields and global food security: will yield increase continue to feed the world? (australian centre for international agricultural research, 2014).reynolds, m. et al. plant cell environ. 35, 1799–1823 (2012).article google scholar senapati, n. et al. nat. food https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00540-9 (2022).article google scholar paleari, l. et al. glob. change biol. 28, 2689–2710 (2022).article google scholar bezner kerr, r. et al. in climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability (eds pörtner, h.-o. et al.) ch. 5 (ipcc, cambridge univ. press, 2022).download referencesinstitute for agro-environmental sciences, national agriculture and food research organization (naro), tsukuba, japantoshihiro hasegawatexas a&m university, agrilife research, beaumont, tx, usalloyd t. wilsonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to toshihiro hasegawa.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionshasegawa, t., wilson, l.t. raising wheat yield ceiling. nat food 3, 493–494 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00550-7download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00550-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 