methanol is a promising feedstock owing to its low price, abundance, energy richness and renewability. however, the toxicity of methanol limits methanol-based biomanufacturing. rescuing methylotrophic yeast from cell death by restoring phospholipid metabolism enables high-level production of free fatty acids from methanol.you have full access to this article via your institution.biomanufacturing mostly focuses on the production of fuels and chemicals from substrates derived from edible crops. however, owing to the ethical issue of using food for chemical production, one-carbon (c1) substrates such as methane, methanol, formate, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide have gained much attention as alternative carbon feedstocks1,2,3. the use of c1 compounds as feedstocks can lead to more sustainable production of fuels and chemicals. although c1 gases such as methane, co2 and co seem a viable option for industrial biotechnology, their narrow product range, lower productivity, slower growth rate and low solubility are major hurdles for industrial implementation. the development of methanol-based biomanufacturing is considered an appealing option; methanol is a promising feedstock owing to its low price, abundance, energy richness and renewability, and it can be produced readily from natural gas or coal and even from co2 via electrocatalytic conversion or hydrogenation4,5. dissimilation of methanol to co2 can generate reducing power in the form of nadh, which can be used for other cellular activities, making methanol an ideal feedstock for the production of reduced fuels and chemicals.however, the use of methanol as a substrate for yeast growth has its shortcomings. growing yeast in methanol can lead to toxicity that results from perturbation of cell membrane integrity. in addition, methanol metabolism leads to the generation of the toxic byproduct formaldehyde. in natural methylotrophic microorganisms, formaldehyde can be assimilated into the biomass by the ribulose monophosphate pathway (rump), the serine pathway or the xylulose monophosphate pathway (xump), or it can be dissipated into co26. in methylotrophic microorganisms, formaldehyde is cytotoxic owing to its nonspecific interaction with nucleic acids and proteins7. methanol itself is cytotoxic because it affects the stability and fluidity of cellular membranes8.methylotrophic yeasts have developed advantages over their bacterial counterparts owing to the presence of peroxisomes, which enable enhanced tolerance to formaldehyde-elicited toxicity. the assimilation of formaldehyde in methylotrophic yeasts usually occurs through the xump pathway, wherein formaldehyde is assimilated by peroxisomal dihydroxyacetone synthase. methylotrophic yeasts use oxygen as an electron acceptor and generate the byproduct h2o2. in methylotrophic yeasts, either h2o2 toxicity is prevented by catalase or h2o2 can be detoxified by the glutathione-based redox system. formaldehyde and h2o2 together are highly toxic, and their accumulation can lead to lower production of cell biomass. however, the exact mechanism of this toxicity during methanol metabolism is not fully understood7. thus, methanol-related toxicity limits the use of methanol as a substrate for industrial applications.to address these technical issues, gao et al. demonstrated that rescuing yeast from cell death enabled the overproduction of fatty acids solely from methanol9. they found that the overproduction of free fatty acids (ffas) from methanol induced by deletion of the acyl-coa synthase gene (faa1) caused a decrease in cellular phospholipid levels, resulting in cell death mediated by the rim101 pathway. free fatty acids can also lower surface tension and thereby impair membrane integrity. it was found that the levels of phospholipids were markedly decreased in a faa1δ strain; this lack of phospholipids might damage the integrity of peroxisomal membranes, leading to formaldehyde leakage into the cytoplasm and subsequent disturbance of methanol metabolism. adaptive laboratory evolution was successfully used to restore the growth of the faa1δ strain.next-generation sequencing of the adaptive laboratory evolution mutants showed that phospholipid pools were maintained by the inactivation of lpl1 (encoding a putative lipase) and izh3 (encoding a membrane protein related to zinc metabolism), which blocked phospholipid degradation and restored the growth of the mutant strain on methanol. the replenishment of xylulose 5-phosphate was enhanced by overexpressing key genes from the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. furthermore, metabolic rewiring based on transcriptomic analysis and metabolic engineering to enhance the supply of acetyl-coa and nadph enabled the highest ffa production of 15.9 g l−1 solely from methanol, with a maximum yield of 0.12 g ffas per gram methanol and 35.3% of theoretical yield, comparable to results from sugar-based production of free fatty acids.in addition, the cellular tolerance to methanol increased to 50 g l−1. this study underscores the importance of yeast engineering to prevent cell death and develop highly efficient methylotrophic yeast for methanol bioconversion. it is also worth noting that the perturbation of lipid homeostasis is one of the key issues in bringing about cellular stress in the methanol-based ffa overproduction strain.there are still open questions and remaining challenges. although deletion of lpl1 and izh3 to fine-tune phospholipid metabolism was demonstrated to be beneficial for cell growth by protecting the integrity of peroxisomal membranes, the exact mechanism by which cell growth was restored by adaptive laboratory evolution still needs to be validated with additional scientific evidence. the clustering of key enzymes for toxic intermediate channelling during methanol assimilation would be a feasible option for engineering enhanced methanol tolerance.for methanol-based biomanufacturing, synthetic methylotrophy is being developed by introducing existing methanol assimilation pathways or new synthetic metabolic pathways into well-known microorganisms such as escherichia coli, corynebacterium glutamicum and yeast10. however, attempts to develop synthetic methylotrophs in e. coli still suffer from slower growth rates and low methanol bioconversion efficiency11. another option could be the development of synthetic pathways for methanol metabolism that decouple central carbon metabolism and methanol utilization12. recently, a recombinant oleaginous yeast (yarrowia lypolitica) was developed for using methanol as a sole carbon source, but the tolerance of this yeast to methanol was low13. in future, the strategy used by gao et al. could be applied to other strains to develop synthetic methylotrophic platforms for the production of fatty acid-derived fuels and chemicals, thus opening up new avenues for enhanced biofuel production based on microbial metabolic engineering (fig. 1).methanol can be produced from natural gas, coal and co2. gao et al. describe the engineering of methylotrophic yeast for overproduction of free fatty acids from methanol. restoration of phospholipid metabolism rescues the yeast from cell death caused by methanol and free fatty acid toxicity. metabolic engineering of the pentose phosphate pathway and gluconeogenesis enables high-level biomanufacturing of free fatty acids from methanol. tolerance and metabolic engineering will pave the way for methanol-based biomanufacturing.free fatty acids have a huge potential to be used for the production of biofuels owing to their high energy content, and they can also be used for the production of detergents, lubricants, cosmetics and pharmaceutical ingredients14. free fatty acids are an attractive target product from methanol because methanol has more available electrons than sugars. in the work of gao et al., methanol-induced and free fatty acid-related cytotoxicity are effectively addressed to overcome perturbed lipid homeostasis and cell death by engineering enhanced tolerance to methanol. this work is likely to contribute to the development of efficient tailor-made cell factories of methylotrophic yeast for methanol-based biomanufacturing of fatty acid-derived fuels and chemicals.cotton, c. a. r., claassens, n. j., benito-vaquerizo, s. & bar-even, a. curr. opin. biotechnol. 62, 168–180 (2020).cas article google scholar bang, j., hwang, c. h., ahn, j. h., lee, j. a. & lee, s. y. nat. microbiol. 5, 1459–1463 (2020).cas article google scholar nguyen, a. d. & lee, e. y. trends biotechnol. 39, 381–396 (2021).cas article google scholar jiang, x. et al. chem. rev. 120, 7984–8034 (2020).cas article google scholar kim, s. et al. nat. chem. biol. 16, 538–545 (2020).cas article google scholar chistoserdova, l. & kalyuzhnaya, m. g. trends microbiol. 26, 703–714 (2018).cas article google scholar fabarius, j. t., wegat, v., roth, a. & sieber, v. trends biotechnol. 39, 348–358 (2021).cas article google scholar leßmeier, l. & wendisch, v. f. bmc microbiol. 15, 216 (2015).article google scholar gao, j., li, y., yu, w. & zhou, y. j. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00601-0 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar wang, y., fan, l., tuyishime, p., zheng, p. & sun, j. trends microbiol. 38, 650–666 (2020).cas google scholar chen, f. y., jung, h. w., tsuei, c. y. & liao, j. c. cell 182, 933–946.e14 (2020).cas article google scholar chou, a., lee, s. h., zhu, f., clomburg, j. m. & gonzalez, r. nat. metab. 3, 1385–1399 (2021).cas article google scholar wang, g. et al. acs synth. biol. 10, 3537–3550 (2021).cas article google scholar duan, x., gao, j. & zhou, y. j. chin. chem. lett. 29, 681–686 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencese.y.l. and a.s. are supported by the c1 gas refinery program through the national research foundation of korea (nrf), funded by the ministry of science and ict (2015m3d3a1a01064882).department of chemical engineering (bk21 four integrated engineering program), kyung hee university, yongin-si, republic of koreaeun yeol lee & arslan sarwaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to eun yeol lee.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionslee, e.y., sarwar, a. methanol-tolerant yeast for biofuel production. nat metab 4, 800–801 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00603-ydownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00603-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 