metal halide perovskite solar cells have shown promising performance, but mainly on small-area devices and under laboratory conditions. now, researchers have demonstrated the fabrication of large-area devices assembled and packaged into modules and reported on their operation outdoors.you have full access to this article via your institution.to enter the market, photovoltaic (pv) technologies need to deliver cost-effective, efficient, and durable modules at scale with predictable energy output in the field. to reach this stage, emerging technologies such as solar cells based on metal halide perovskites need to overcome several challenges including making quality cells at scale; integrating these cells into high-energy-yield modules at a relevant scale; and producing predictable energy output outdoors. so far, most demonstrations of perovskite solar cells with promising efficiency and durability have been on devices smaller than 1 cm2 and only indoors under simulated field conditions. commercially relevant modules have area on the order of 2 m2. while focus is starting to shift to processing at scale, outdoor field demonstrations have all remained below 1% of 1 m2 (refs. 1,2,3). while these previous works are an important step forward for perovskite pv technology, studying small area devices may miss processing and degradation concerns that only emerge at larger scale.now, writing in nature energy, sara pescetelli, antonio agresti and colleagues across italy and greece report on the upscaling and manufacturing of metal halide perovskite solar cells to fabricate a total of 4.5 m2 of modules. the researchers then integrated the modules into a standalone pv system and monitored their performance outdoors for nine months (fig. 1a) (ref. 4).a, 4.5 m2 of metal halide perovskite modules installed in crete (greece). b, 9 months of outdoor performance data.to do so, pescetelli, agresti and team faced a number of challenges. the first is making quality cells that are reproducible, efficient, durable at relevant scale. these cells would implement substrates, cell layer compositions, and fabrication processes that can be adopted in manufacturing. the team fabricated thousands of 9.1 cm2 cells, demonstrating that they can repeatedly deliver working cells only a factor of 3 smaller than thin-film cells that have been successfully commercialized. drawing on processes that have succeeded on smaller scales5, they use graphene-doped electron transport layers and functionalised mos2 buffer layers between the perovskite and the hole transporting layer. here, the researchers have demonstrated that these interfacial engineering approaches are scalable and consistent with a robust manufacturing process while maintaining 12.5% average efficiency and delivering 90 days of acceptable field performance, comparable to other contemporary perovskite devices.next, individual cells need to be assembled into modules that produce the desired electrical output. this requires cells to be interconnected electrically and protected by a weatherproof package. making efficient, durable modules at scale means implementing materials and processes for interconnection and packaging that are appropriate for commercialization and mass production. taking a step in this direction, the researchers fabricated modules that consist of interconnected submodules with relatively small areas (0.1 m2) instead of using a single large-area substrate as is common in commercial thin-film modules. this allows them to minimise the current challenges associated with upscaling devices. then, to protect the perovskite cells, they adapted a conventional pv module package based on a glass/encapsulant/backsheet structure. for each submodule, they inserted a kapton foil barrier layer between the ethylene-vinyl acetate (eva) encapsulant and the device. the kapton foil acts as a barrier and protects the device from any acetic acid generated by the eva encapsulant that might degrade the device layers. they then tuned lamination temperature and pressure to be compatible with temperature-sensitive layers in the device. although a separate acetic acid barrier made from an expensive polymer is not part of any commercial module design, this approach allowed the team to simultaneously test and deploy 4.5 m2 of modules incorporating the largest total area of cell material to date.another key step, and perhaps the most important challenge, is the production of predictable and sustained energy output. field performance models predict how a hypothetical pv power plant will perform in a given location [6. these models require understanding a device’s response to variable light and temperature conditions. such models can be derived from laboratory or field measurements of the device’s behaviour. testing solar cells in the field is key for developing and validating better models, especially in materials with time- or state-dependent performance. however, as mentioned above, prior field demonstrations based on small-area devices are limited in the data and insights they can provide. as such, the field test performed by pescetelli, agresti and colleagues represents forward progress. the researchers report on the operation of their large-area perovskite modules outdoors for 9 months (fig. 1b). they find that the modules have a small temperature coefficient of power compared to c-si and cdte and that their performance follows a pattern that could be described by a simple empirical model.in addition to the analysis performed and presented in their current work, the researchers have published a subset of the pv system performance data in an online repository, allowing for community exploration7. this information represents a small sample of what will be required to implement field performance models for perovskite solar cells.the researchers showed a reduction of 20% in power output over nine months of deployment in the field. while this represents progress for a handmade prototype of an emerging technology, this rate of degradation must be improved by orders of magnitude to compete with commercial technology. opportunities remain for improving the technical maturity of these cells and modules.some examples of cell-level improvements and areas for continued research include: tightening the efficiency distribution through optimized processing, elimination of the gold contacts that have recently been demonstrated as a degradation pathway in perovskites8, and reduction of dead areas between subcells to maximise the power density. pescetelli, agresti and colleagues use spin coating, a favourite tool among academic groups, to fabricate the modules. however, spin coating will likely be replaced by more commercially relevant deposition processes that can be done at speed and scale, such as slot die coatings, or various vapour deposition approaches.in the module, there is also room for improvement: making the device tolerant of lamination temperatures or developing low-temperature encapsulants to minimise degradation of the perovskite layer; identifying an encapsulant that avoids corrosion due to acetic acid; use of thinner, high-transmission glass that is designed for use in pv applications; and using the device superstrate as the cover glass to eliminate separate cover glass. while the final package design of a commercial perovskite module remains undecided, the work of pescetelli, agresti and team provides a great start and a demonstration of some of the options available.the researchers make an unprecedented attempt at solving many key challenges associated with real-world demonstration and show the promise of perovskite pv technology. their work is a leap forward to improving the technical maturity of perovskite solar cells. nevertheless, commercial pv modules based on crystalline silicon or cadmium telluride already offer 40 times longer service life at higher efficiency and low cost, so one of the challenges to commercialization is delivering energy for decades alongside incumbent technologies that continue to improve. perovskite pv technologies are not at a commercial stage yet but there are plenty of opportunities to continue improving this technology.stoichkov, v. et al. sol. energy 170, 549–556 (2018).article google scholar emery, q. et al. acs appl. mater. interfaces 14, 5159–5167 (2022).article google scholar velilla, e. et al. nat. energy 6, 54–62 (2021).article google scholar pescetelli, s. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01035-4 (2022).article google scholar agresti, a. et al. acs energy lett. 4, 1862–1871 (2019).article google scholar system advisor model (nrel) http://sam.nrel.gov (2018).nano@hmu group https://solarfarmhmu.gr/ (2021).kerner, r. a. et al. acs energy lett. 5, 3352–3356 (2020).article google scholar download referencesefforts by l.t.s. and t.j.s. were supported by the us department of energy’s office of energy efficiency and renewable energy (eere) under the solar energy technologies office award number 38050. the views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the doe or the us government.national renewable energy laboratory, golden, co, usatimothy j silverman & laura t. schelhasyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to timothy j silverman or laura t. schelhas.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssilverman, t.j., schelhas, l.t. venturing outdoors. nat energy 7, 576–577 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01072-zdownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01072-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 