ultraviolet radiation exerts differential effects in men and women. parikh et al. reveal that solar exposure on the skin triggers food-seeking behaviour in males, but not females, through a mechanism dependent on ghrelin secretion from skin adipocytes.you have full access to this article via your institution.the global burden of disease estimates that almost 60% of all mortality is attributed to environmental factors, which have a direct impact on individuals according to the ‘exposome’ concept, described as the totality of human environmental exposures (non-genetic) from conception onwards. the exposome includes three domains: (1) the general external environment (such as sun exposure and pollution); (2) a specific external environment (diet, physical activity etc.) and (3) an internal environment (such as metabolism and the microbiota)1. the relevance of considering the exposome is becoming evident in light of data showing the rising prevalence of metabolic diseases, associated with global increases in body mass index. the impact of natural environmental factors such as sunlight exposure is known; this factor causes skin cancer while also being associated with health benefits including protection from autoimmunity, cardiovascular disease, obesity and diabetes2. however, uncovering the mechanisms and pathways by which environmental exposures influence body homeostasis is challenging. in this issue of nature metabolism, a team led by professor carmit levy describes a new mechanism by which solar exposure induces sex-specific food-seeking behaviour3.the authors first analysed a three-year national nutrition survey that included data from approximately 3,000 individuals and found a significant interaction between sex and season, revealing that men, but not women, increased their food intake during the summer, a time when solar radiation is at its peak. this was confirmed in volunteers who spent time in the sun: men felt hungrier upon solar exposure while women did not. mass spectrometry of blood samples indicated that men showed more changes in proteins associated with lipid metabolism and increased circulating levels of ghrelin, a hormone that stimulates food intake and adiposity4.preclinical studies in mice not only corroborated clinical data, but also unmasked a novel and unexpected mechanism to explain the findings. male mice subjected to uvb exposure displayed increased food intake and were more motivated to search for food. these animals also had increases in plasma ghrelin. surprisingly, circulating ghrelin was not correlated with the expression of ghrelin in the stomach, where ghrelin is mainly produced, but with its expression in skin adipocytes, where ghrelin has been previously found5. whether this increase of ghrelin in skin adipocytes is the sole contributor to the increased circulating levels of the hormone remains to be determined, but the higher levels of ghrelin in blood were in consonance with the higher expression of hypothalamic agouti-related peptide, one of the key regulators of ghrelin-induced food intake in the brain. interestingly, increased food intake in solar-exposed mice was not only related to this homeostatic pathway that is key for satisfying immediate energy requirements, but also to the rewarding properties of food, since these mice showed increased food-seeking behaviour, a process mostly associated with the hedonic value of food. indeed, ghrelin can induce feeding by stimulating the activity of midbrain dopamine neurons6. however, some of the usual suspects, such as the opioid system, which is heavily involved in the rewarding properties of eating, could not explain uvb-induced food-seeking behaviour in this model.different fat depots secrete different hormones and other factors that have the capacity to regulate feeding behaviour, but much less is known about the metabolic action of dermal adipose tissue. this fat depot is mostly known for its role in skin wound healing and hair regeneration, but it is also regulated by hormonal inputs and is capable of secreting adipokines7. parikh et al. further showed that uvb radiation upregulated p53 (a transcription factor that suppresses tumour growth through regulation of many target genes) in the skin (epidermis, dermis and hypodermis), which led to activation of the ghrelin promoter3 (fig. 1). the specificity of these results was demonstrated because male mice lacking p53 in skin adipocytes did not eat more and were not motivated to search for food upon uvb exposure. indeed, p53 expression in the adipose tissue has been previously shown to be involved in the development of insulin resistance and increased production of proinflammatory cytokines8, but its relevance in terms of ghrelin production is an intriguing finding that will need further exploration. the fact that skin adipocytes can also modulate energy balance adds a new subtype of adipocytes to take into account for future studies.uvb exposure stimulates food-seeking behaviour in males but not in females. in male skin adipocytes, p53 increases the transcription of ghrelin. however, in females, oestrogens block the p53-mediated transcriptional activity.why are females not affected in a similar fashion to males after solar exposure? the authors found that oestrogens block p53 transcriptional activation of ghrelin. accordingly, ovariectomized females, which have low circulating oestrogen, exhibited higher food intake when exposed to uvb. intriguingly, this is contrary to what has been reported in cancer, since oestradiol increases p53 via enhancing p53 protein stability or promoting p53 gene transcription through multiple transcription factors. the effects of p53 on ghrelin in skin adipose tissue suggests a protective role of oestrogens, in addition to their multiple metabolic actions. of note, the orexigenic effect of ghrelin in the hypothalamus was previously shown to be p53 dependent9, although the signalling pathways mediating ghrelin expression and its orexigenic action are likely to be different.overall, this exciting study reveals that uvb exposure enhances food-seeking behaviour in males through a mechanism involving a p53-dependent transcriptional activation of ghrelin in skin adipocytes. this mechanism is interrupted in females by the action of oestrogens, thus explaining the reported sexual dimorphisms. future studies assessing the influence of age and ethnicity in relation to uvb exposure and food intake are eagerly awaited. finally, this work will surely pave the way for further studies on the role of the skin in energy and metabolic homeostasis, a field that had largely been overlooked.beulens, j. w. j. et al. diabetologia 65, 263–274 (2022).cas article google scholar hart, p. h., norval, m., byrne, s. n. & rhodes, l. e. annu. rev. pathol. 14, 55–81 (2019).cas article google scholar parikh, s. et al. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00587-9 (2022).müller, t. d. et al. mol. metab. 4, 437–460 (2015).article google scholar cicek, d. et al. eur. j. dermatol. 25, 323–328 (2015).cas article google scholar abizaid, a. et al. j. clin. invest. 116, 3229–3239 (2006).cas article google scholar rivera-gonzalez, g., shook, b. & horsley, v. cold spring harb. perspect. med. 4, a015271 (2014).article google scholar minamino, t. et al. nat. med. 15, 1082–1087 (2009).cas article google scholar quiñones, m. et al. nat. commun. 9, 3432 (2018).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of physiology, cimus, university of santiago de compostela, santiago de compostela, spaincarlos dieguez & ruben nogueirasciber fisiopatologia de la obesidad y nutrición (ciberobn), madrid, spaincarlos dieguez & ruben nogueirasgalician agency of innovation (gain), xunta de galicia, santiago de compostela, spainruben nogueirasyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ruben nogueiras.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdieguez, c., nogueiras, r. sun exposure stimulates appetite in males. nat metab 4, 796–797 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00592-ydownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00592-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 