regulation of organ growth involves multiple pathways that coordinate cell number and size in a process that is highly dependent on nutrient supply and energy levels. the simplicity of the arabidopsis root tip provides a suitable model for the genetic dissection of plant organ growth regulation.you have full access to this article via your institution.post-embryonic development in plants is supported by the mitotic activity of stem and progenitor cells in the meristems, which are dependent on the switch from heterotrophic utilization of maternal seed reserves to photosynthesis-driven metabolic reprogramming. the target of rapamycin (tor) is an evolutionary conserved kinase that integrates nutrient and energy signalling to promote cell proliferation and growth1. in the root meristem, auxin cooperates with plethora (plt) transcription factors to position the stem cell niche around the less mitotically active quiescent centre (qc) cells and to maintain the division of transit amplifying daughter cells2. the arabidopsis root tip is characterized by a conserved histological structure consisting of a layer of columella stem cells (cscs), immediately distal to the qc, and several tiers of their differentiated descendants, the columella cells (ccs), which contain starch-filled plastids (amyloplasts) required for gravity sensing (fig. 1a). zhang et al., in this issue of nature plants, show that a fine-tuning mechanism of tor kinase-mediated plt2 gradient regulation maintains root tip homeostasis during the heterotrophic-to-autotrophic transition, ensuring proper gravitropism and root growth3.a, photosynthesis provides sugar and auxin metabolites that are transported to root meristems to ensure organ growth and development. the green triangle indicates the plt2 gradient in the indicated region. b, proposed model of top1α-mediated regulation of tor kinase. lines represent direct (solid) or indirect (dashed) regulation; blue and red lines indicate positive and negative regulation, respectively; p indicates phosphorylation.the authors identified topoisomerase1α (top1α) in a genetic screen for mutants with altered root meristem activity and wavy (agravitropic) roots in sucrose-supplemented medium. they established that premature csc differentiation in top1α mutants was downstream or independent of the central wuschel related homeobox5 (wox5) and clavata3/esr80 related40 (cle40) pathways. further genetic and biochemical analyses identified glucose-activated tor kinase as a downstream target of top1α function involved in root tip homeostasis3. although tor expression was found to be severely upregulated in the root tip of top1α mutants in sucrose-supplemented medium, top1α-mediated transcriptional regulation of tor kinase requires further investigation.whole root tip transcriptome analysis of wild type and top1α mutants treated or not treated with a specific tor kinase inhibitor identified a small overlap of differentially-regulated genes. several cell cycle-related genes, such as cyclin d3;3 (cycd3;3) and e2fa, were identified as being regulated by tor kinase in a top1α-dependent manner. indeed, cycd3;3 or e2fa mutations rescued csc identity and restored root gravitropism of top1α mutants grown in sucrose-supplemented media. the authors discovered a similar regulatory mechanism of top1α on tor kinase and cell cycle gene expression in response to sugars in a human cancer cell line3. their results could shed some light on the observed synergistic interaction of dna topoisomerase i-targeted drugs and tor kinase inhibitors for the treatment of invasive human cancers4.interestingly, among the key transcription factors required for root tip organization, only plt2 was found deregulated in top1α mutants in sucrose-supplemented medium. on the one hand, a functional plt2-yfp protein accumulated in the ccs of top1α mutants in a tor kinase-dependent manner, due to increased plt2 expression and reduced proteasome-dependent plt2 turnover. in addition, some of the cell cycle-related genes upregulated in top1α mutants grown in sucrose-supplemented medium, such as cycd5;1, are direct targets of plt2. indeed, the plt2 mutation completely rescued csc identity and cc organization and root gravitropism in top1α3. on the other hand, they showed that the tor kinase interacts with and phosphorylates the n-terminal domain of plt2 in planta, which leads to its greater stabilization. additional biochemical evidence identified the critical serine residue required for tor kinase-mediated stabilization of plt2. their results are consistent with a model (fig. 1b) in which top1α-mediated fine-tuning of tor kinase activity at the root tip maintains the plt2 gradient in the columella, which is required for csc division and proper differentiation of the ccs3.the experimental increase in auxin levels at the root tip also promoted csc differentiation, which depended on a short-range network of auxin response factors arf10 and arf165. pin-formed2 (pin2), a facilitator of auxin efflux necessary for the establishment of the auxin gradient in the root meristem, was recently identified as a phosphorylation target of the sugar-activated tor kinase, which is required to set the cell division–cell growth boundary6. thus, tor kinase could act as a feed-forward hub to coordinate cell division and cell growth in the root meristem in response to energy input and by fine-tuning the morphogen gradients of auxin and plt2. on the other hand, in differentiated ccs, top1α represses tor kinase function through an unknown molecular mechanism. another unresolved issue is the putative role of e2fa in top1α-dependent tor kinase regulation, as this gene has also been identified as a downstream effector of ethylene-insensitive protein2 (ein2), which is also a phosphorylation target of the tor kinase7. recent biochemical data on mammalian tor kinase targets8 will allow all plant tor kinase substrates to be identified, and the network of interactions involved in crosstalk between organ growth and energy metabolism could started to be established using the arabidopsis root tip as a model system.dobrenel, t. et al. annu. rev. plant biol. 67, 261–285 (2016).cas article google scholar mähönen, a. p. et al. nature 515, 125–129 (2014).article google scholar zhang, h. et al. nat. plants https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01179-x (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar ki, d. h., oppel, f., durbin, a. d. & look, a. t. oncogene 38, 6585–6598 (2019).cas article google scholar ding, z. & friml, j. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 107, 12046–12051 (2010).cas article google scholar yuan, x., xu, p., yu, y. & xiong, y. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 117, 32223–32225 (2020).cas article google scholar fu, l. et al. nature 591, 288–292 (2021).cas article google scholar battaglioni, s., benjamin, d., wälchli, m., maier, t. & hall, m. n. cell 185, 1814–1836 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesinstituto de bioingeniería, universidad miguel hernández, elche, alicante, spainjosé-manuel pérez-pérezyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to josé-manuel pérez-pérez.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionspérez-pérez, jm. don’t tor at the top. nat. plants 8, 729–730 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01182-2download citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01182-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 