a machine-learning model produces summarized sequence representations of genomic regulatory activity, and provides a functional view of regulatory dna variation in the human genome, with the aim of better understanding the role of sequence variation in health and disease.you have full access to this article via your institution.concerted efforts to profile, harmonize and catalog molecular activity across the human genome are producing an ever-expanding annotation of dynamic regulatory and transcriptional elements in diverse cellular and tissue contexts1,2,3,4. however, using these context-specific annotations to decipher the causal effects of primary genomic sequence and genetic variation on molecular and disease phenotypes has been challenging. in this issue, chen et al.5 address this challenge with a machine-learning framework, known as sei, to predict a condensed vocabulary of context-specific regulatory activity for genomic sequences and variants of interest.the functional effect of variation in regulatory dna sequence depends on local sequence context, the cellular context, and the specific measure of functional activity, which is often reflected in a biochemical readout6 such as transcription factor binding, chromatin state or gene expression. hence, predictive models of regulatory dna and variants must be context aware. the sei model builds on previous approaches that use multi-task neural networks to learn a predictive mapping from dna sequence tiles across the genome to associated transcription factor binding and chromatin activity from datasets available in diverse cell types and tissues7,8,9,10. the trained models can be used to predict the effects of any sequence or sequence variation on different molecular readouts in cellular contexts that the model is trained on. however, the interpretation of variant effects becomes increasingly challenging as the number of contexts grows, which has motivated several summarization approaches. context-aware predictions of variant effect from multi-task models have been used to train meta-predictors of variant pathogenicity on gold-standard sets of pathogenic and benign variants9. an alternative post hoc approach uses dimensionality reduction to interpret variant effect predictions from a multi-task model of regulatory dna over a large number of contexts8. other multi-task models have been developed that directly map sequences to partially overlapping ‘topic’ classes from measured activity of sequences over multiple contexts11.relative to previous work, the sei model is trained on a substantially larger collection of 21,907 genome-wide transcription factor and chromatin profiling datasets that span over 1,300 cell lines and tissues. to summarize predicted sequence and variant effects across this enormous range of contexts, chen et al.5 cluster predicted context-specific effects of sequences across the genome into a compact set of 40 ‘sequence classes’, which are intended to capture correlated molecular effects across biologically related cellular contexts. however, reducing dimensionality to a highly restricted set of 40 sequence classes is likely to cause significant loss in contextual resolution, particularly for rare, distinct cell contexts. the robustness of these sequence classes as a function of sample diversity and redundancy will require further investigation, as well as the ability to adaptively extend these classes with the availability of new data. nevertheless, the sei framework effectively provides a broad view of the functional range of regulatory dna variation in the human genome (fig. 1).the sei model can be thought of as a prism, providing a mapping from any genomic sequence or genetic variant to a compact set of sequence classes that represent a broad spectrum of biological functions and cellular contexts. however, the sei model does not directly aid our understanding of how sequence affects function, and its effective functional resolution is limited.the key appeal of predictive sequence models such as sei is their ability to provide biological insights into sequence variation via in silico perturbation experiments. chen et al.5 present several exciting case studies demonstrating the utility of the sei model and sequence classes for interpreting molecular quantitative trait loci (qtl) and genome-wide association studies. importantly, owing to the nature of the sei model, predictions of variant effect can be made for any variant of interest, including those not previously observed. this provides the promising opportunity to investigate rare disease-associated mutations, which chen et al.5 explore by comparing pathogenic mutation effects12 with predicted sequence class activity levels. however, the specific benefits of using sequence classes for these analyses as opposed to using individual contexts is not always clear. furthermore, the sequence classes modeled in the sei framework are defined solely on the basis of coordinated patterns of predicted activity across the diverse contexts, which does not in itself indicate co-regulation, because of potentially distinct patterns of causal regulatory sequence syntax encoded in sequences. several model interpretation approaches have been proposed to dissect contextual, predictive local and global sequence features7,13,14,15. applying these approaches to the sei model could provide additional granularity to sequence classes based on co-activation and co-regulation, leading to deeper insights into the cis-regulatory sequence code affected by functional variants.the sei model contributes several neural network architecture innovations by incorporating linear and nonlinear paths and spatial basis functions, adding to the ever-increasing repertoire of deep-learning models of regulatory dna15. although significant improvements are achieved over previous generation deepsea models9, the attribution of these improvements to the architectural changes versus other factors such as longer sequence context and training schemes is unclear. it is likely that the biggest gains will be achieved by further increasing input sequence context and receptive fields as shown in recent work8,16. contemporary models have largely moved away from course-resolution, binary classification training objectives to predicting quantitative coverage scores at higher resolution, while accounting for assay biases and other confounders7,8,16. indeed, the sei framework could be extended to quantitative readouts, further improving its predictive power for variant effects. sei also exemplifies a trend towards building increasingly larger multi-task models with the goal of learning highly generalizable representations of regulatory dna. however, multi-tasking can result in suboptimal models for rare outlier tasks and conflicting tasks as well as erroneous predictions due to leakage of non-causal features across unrelated tasks. additional efforts are necessary to identify and rectify these potential pitfalls. systematic benchmarks and evaluations will have an important role in the future to understand the benefits of different architectures, loss functions, data processing and other modeling choices.the sei framework lays the foundation for future platforms for multi-scale, contextual exploration of regulatory dna variation through the lens of predictive sequence models that will distill in silico predictions of sequence perturbations through stable, biologically interpretable hierarchies of sequence classes, honing in on the most relevant contexts in an efficient and scalable manner.roadmap epigenomics consortium. nature 518, 317–330 (2015).article google scholar encode project consortium. nature 583, 699–710 (2020).article google scholar zheng, r. et al. nucleic acids res. 47, d729–d735 (2019).cas article google scholar meuleman, w. et al. nature 584, 244–251 (2020).cas article google scholar chen, k. m., wong, a. k., troyanskaya, o. g. & zhou, j. nat. genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01102-2 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar zentner, g. e. & henikoff, s. nat. rev. genet. 15, 814–827 (2014).cas article google scholar avsec, ž. et al. nat. genet. 53, 354–366 (2021).cas article google scholar avsec, ž. et al. nat. methods 18, 1196–1203 (2021).cas article google scholar zhou, j. & troyanskaya, o. g. nat. methods 12, 931–934 (2015).cas article google scholar zhou, j. et al. nat. genet. 50, 1171–1179 (2018).cas article google scholar janssens, j. et al. nature 601, 630–636 (2022).cas article google scholar stenson, p. d. et al. hum. genet. 139, 1197–1207 (2020).article google scholar maslova, a. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 117, 25655–25666 (2020).cas article google scholar alipanahi, b., delong, a., weirauch, m. t. & frey, b. j. nat. biotechnol. 33, 831–838 (2015).cas article google scholar ching, t. et al. j. r. soc. interface 15, 20170387 (2018).article google scholar zhou, j. nat. genet. 54, 725–734 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of genetics, stanford university, palo alto, ca, usaanshul kundajedepartment of computer science, stanford university, palo alto, ca, usaanshul kundajealtius institute for biomedical sciences, seattle, wa, usawouter meulemanpaul g. allen school of computer science & engineering, university of washington, seattle, wa, usawouter meulemanyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to anshul kundaje or wouter meuleman.a.k. is scientific co-founder of ravel biotechnology, is on the scientific advisory board of patchbio, serimmune, ainovo, tensorbio and opentargets, is a consultant with illumina and owns shares in deepgenomics, immuni and freenome. w.m. has no competing interests.reprints and permissionskundaje, a., meuleman, w. automated sequence-based annotation and interpretation of the human genome. nat genet 54, 916–917 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01123-xdownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01123-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 