a large-scale collaborative effort now provides a comprehensive annotation of functional non-coding elements in the zebrafish genome. this work serves as an essential foundation for future studies to understand how gene regulatory circuits control embryonic development.you have full access to this article via your institution.twenty years ago, the human genome project revealed that understanding how a genome shapes an organism could not be gleaned from sequence alone1,2. aside from coding sequence, nearly 99% of the human genome at that time lacked a functional role, inspiring a large-scale collaborative effort, known as the encyclopedia of dna elements (encode) project3, to better characterize non-coding sequence. a decade later, encode provided integrated analyses of chromatin modifications and accessibility, along with gene expression data, across multiple tissues and cell types to derive a comprehensive annotation of cis-regulatory elements in the human genome4. recently completing its third phase, encode has cataloged nearly one million cis-regulatory elements in the human genome, including those involved in both transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, along with comparative datasets for the mouse genome5. as encode continues into its fourth phase, large-scale genetic perturbation studies and reporter assays will help to provide functional validation of predictions made from earlier stages of the project.over the past 20 years, the zebrafish has become a widely accepted model organism. its rapid embryogenesis and externally fertilized transparent embryos make the zebrafish particularly suited for developmental studies. the zebrafish is also amenable to forward and reverse genetic approaches, which facilitate gene discovery and modeling of human diseases. in 2013, the zebrafish genome sequence was completed by the wellcome sanger institute6. at 1.4 gigabases and encoding at least 25,000 genes, the size of the zebrafish genome is comparable to other vertebrates and more than 70% of human genes have zebrafish orthologs. as with the human genome, the lack of non-coding annotations has presented a major challenge to the zebrafish community, but government-sponsored initiatives, such as those supporting encode, never emerged to fill this gap. fortunately, the highly collegial nature of the zebrafish community, which previously fostered ground-breaking large-scale genetic efforts7, facilitated a grass-roots approach that was formalized in 2014 as the danio-code consortium8. danio-code now comprises more than 30 laboratories across the globe and, in this issue of nature genetics, they report their first efforts toward an extensive annotation of non-coding elements in the zebrafish genome9.the first goal of danio-code was to establish a centralized data coordination center to standardize quality control, mapping, and metadata across all datasets. here, the consortium adopted pipelines previously used in other similar consortia, such as encode. using these, they re-analyzed nearly 1,500 published datasets, along with more than 350 new ones. among the assays were chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (chip–seq) for chromatin modifications associated with promoters and enhancers, assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (atac-seq) to detect accessible genomic regions, rna sequencing (rna-seq) to build gene models, cap analysis of gene expression (cage) for mapping 5′-transcript ends, and hi-c or 4c-seq for detecting intrachromosomal interactions. importantly, these datasets spanned 15 distinct developmental stages, as well as adult tissues, allowing a dynamic assessment of genomic changes during embryogenesis. the data coordination center also serves as a source for publicly sharing all datasets with the scientific community, for example by hosting track hubs that can be visualized on the ucsc genome browser (fig. 1).the danio-code consortium reanalyzed and generated hundreds of datasets to comprehensively annotate the zebrafish genome throughout embryogenesis, identifying functional elements that are specific to certain tissues and/or developmental stages.the authors then leveraged their datasets to annotate zebrafish non-coding elements, with an emphasis on promoters and enhancers. for the former, they first used rna-seq to identify gene models and incorporated cage reads, which capture the 5’-ends of transcripts and correspond to promoters, to definitively identify transcriptional start sites. as noted, these data span multiple embryonic stages, providing a temporally dynamic view of promoter changes during development. the authors also tested the accuracy of this ‘promoterome’ by applying enzymatically inactive cas9 (dcas9), which blocks binding of transcriptional activators at promoters, to reduce expression at selected promoters. targeting dcas9 to cage-defined versus ensembl-defined transcriptional start sites led to more robust gene repression, supporting that the former was a more accurate annotation for active promoters and providing a resource to researchers for gene knockdown studies. the authors further expanded promoter characterization by incorporating chromatin modifications and accessibility over developmental time, along with sequence conservation. these analyses revealed a diverse array of unique promoter architectures with dynamic patterns of activation during embryonic development. while the biological relevance of these distinct patterns is currently unclear, it provides a starting point for interrogation through future hypothesis-driven experiments.this work also provides an initial annotation of active enhancers in the zebrafish genome, again by integrating accessibility and chromatin modification patterns. from their analysis, they identified over 100,000 elements with predicted enhancer activity that could be further classified based on their dynamic activation patterns across development stages. enhancers were also functionally validated by co-expression of enhancer rnas from nuclear cage, as well as by comparison to published reporter assays where available. the authors subsequently leveraged available single-cell atac-seq data to make predictive calls concerning cell-specific activity for approximately 40,000 enhancers (fig. 1), many of which could be supported by published reporter assays. by subsequently incorporating data from intrachromosomal interactions (from hi-c and 4c-seq datasets), the authors then assessed interactions between these enhancers and promoters in the context of genomic regulatory blocks. this analysis revealed a unique genomic feature referred to by the authors as h3k27ac ensembles, which share features with super-enhancers, major control regions typically found near lineage-specifying genes10. h3k27ac ensembles appear more expansive and numerous than super-enhancers, while being associated with expression of early developmental genes prior to lineage specification. importantly, by developing a novel strategy to align distantly related genomes, the authors could identify syntenic regulatory elements shared between mouse and zebrafish to demonstrate that h3k27ac ensembles are likely a conserved feature of vertebrate genome regulation. thus, the efforts of danio-code to provide an exhaustive annotation for the zebrafish genome can facilitate the identification of unique, conserved, and developmentally relevant genomic regulatory features.along with its utility as a model for developmental studies, the zebrafish has been successfully used for discovering functional non-coding sequences important for transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. with the arrival of this impressive first effort from the danio-code consortium, there is now a centralized infrastructure and resource to integrate and expand such studies. future work will hopefully include functional interrogation of elements identified in this first round of analysis, for example through reporter assays, which can be performed directly and rapidly in vivo in zebrafish embryos. more comprehensive incorporation of single-cell molecular approaches is also necessary, as this initial danio-code effort relies largely on whole embryos, potentially confounding interpretation of the current work. since few zebrafish cell lines are available, further technical advances in molecular analysis at single-cell resolution and their application to zebrafish embryos will be essential for future danio-code phases. finally, the encode project, along with parallel efforts for model organisms, enjoyed generous large-scale funding efforts from the national institutes of health. however, the zebrafish has been consistently left out of these opportunities. as noted above, danio-code emerged from a grass-roots effort in the zebrafish community and was supported only by ‘à la carte’ funding. if their efforts are to be considered a starting point for future consortium-based studies, the hope is that the foundational work described here will serve as inspiration for a more supportive funding environment for follow-up projects.lander, e. s. et al. nature 409, 860–921 (2001).cas article google scholar venter, j. c. et al. science 291, 1304–1351 (2001).cas article google scholar science 306, 636–640 (2004).the encode project consortium. nature 489, 57–74 (2012).article google scholar the encode project consortium. et al. nature 583, 699–710 (2020).cas article google scholar howe, k. et al. nature 496, 498–503 (2013).cas article google scholar mullins, m. c., navajas acedo, j., priya, r., solnica-krezel, l. & wilson, s. w. development 148, dev200343 (2021).cas article google scholar tan, h., onichtchouk, d. & winata, c. zebrafish 13, 54–60 (2016).cas article google scholar baranasic, d. et al. nat. genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01089-w (2022).whyte, w. a. et al. cell 153, 307–319 (2013).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of molecular, cell, and cancer biology, university of massachusetts chan medical school, worcester, ma, usanathan d. lawsonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to nathan d. lawson.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionslawson, n.d. decoding the zebrafish genome. nat genet 54, 917–919 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01080-5download citationpublished: 04 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01080-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 