originally suggested for the detection of gravitational waves, resonantly vibrating metal beams have been used in a recent laboratory experiment to measure newton’s constant of gravitation and to verify newton’s gravitational law.you have full access to this article via your institution.newton’s constant of gravitation is a measure for the coupling strength between masses and its value is independent of where it is measured — be it in a galaxy far, far away or in a laboratory on earth. it cannot be derived from other constants because it is fundamental and must be determined from experiments. now writing in nature physics, brack and colleagues report an experiment with vibrating metal beams to measure newton’s constant of gravitation, which uses not only masses of a different shape than most previous experiments but also operates at higher frequencies, providing an alternative measurement approach1.the value of newton’s constant of gravitation recommended by the committee on data for science and technology, is 6.67430 × 10–11 m3 kg–1 s–2 with a measurement uncertainty of 2.2 × 10–5 (ref. 2). these numbers illustrate two critical points. first, the coupling strength is extremely weak. as an example, the force acting between two spherical masses of 1 kg each located at a distance of 1 m equals the weight of about eight birch pollen grains3. second, the uncertainty is high compared to other fundamental constants. take the fine structure constant, the coupling strength of electromagnetic interaction, for example. its value is known more than five orders of magnitude more precise than newton’s constant of gravitation.the reason for the large uncertainty lies not only in the weak coupling. although the influences of other fields can be largely shielded when measuring the electromagnetic force, for example, by a faraday cage, this is not possible for gravitational experiments, which is why they have to be conducted with extreme caution. the large spread of about 500 parts per million between the measured values of newton’s constant of gravitation suggests that not all potential error sources have been investigated or revealed. the smallest uncertainty ever reached is only 12 parts per million4. the reason for this discrepancy, however, is yet unclear and a broader diversity of experimental set-ups has been recommended5 to get to the bottom of this.the gold standard for measurement of newton’s constant of gravitation is the torsion balance (fig. 1a)6 — first used by henry cavendish in 17987 — which consists of two spherical test masses attached to the ends of a bar. this bar is suspended from a very thin wire, connected to the midpoint of the bar, and is balanced horizontally in the earth’s gravity field. because the restoring force of the wire is extremely weak, the bar can be easily twisted in the horizontal plane. when another mass — a so-called source mass — is moved closer to one of the test masses, the wire gets twisted by a certain angle until the restoring force of the wire equals the gravitational force acting between the test and the source mass. the angular deflection is a measure of the gravitational force, which can be used to calculate the value of newton’s constant of gravitation.a, a torsion balance, as used by cavendish, is a typical arrangement to measure newton’s gravitational constant. b, set-up of brack and colleagues1. they suspended a 1-m-long horizontal (transmitter) bar from two wires. this bar was set into harmonic transverse oscillation by means of a piezo transducer and a small counter mass attached to the bar (green box). a detector bar of the same length, also suspended from two wires was arranged in 6 cm parallel from the transmitter bar. the modulated gravitational field by the transmitter bar caused the receiver bar to oscillate at the same frequency — a signature that this excitation is induced from gravitational coupling.in most experiments the restoring force is kept as small as possible to increase the deflection and the masses are usually either spheres or cylinders, which have approximately the same height as the diameter, to facilitate modelling of the gravitational field. brack and colleagues turned this ‘rule’ upside down. two metal beams with rectangular cross-sections acted as source (transmitter beam) and as test mass (detector beam). both beams were suspended in a parallel arrangement with a separation of about 6 cm from the laboratory ceiling. as illustrated in fig. 1b, a small piezo transducer, combined with a small counter mass, was attached to the centre of the transmitter beam and set into a harmonic bending motion at a frequency of 42.6 hz, which coincided with the eigenfrequency of the detector beam. the bending motion of the transmitter beam excited the detector beam, leading to vibrations with an amplitude of 25 pm by pure gravitational interaction at resonance.but what made brack and colleagues decide to take the road less travelled? the answer to this question lies in gravitational wave research, where it was proposed early on to use metal bars for their detection8. the relative path length change that an astronomical gravitational wave generates in space-time is on the order of 10–20 or less, which implies that the length of a 1-m-long bar would change by only a hundredth of an attometre9.the measurement of such a small length change in the experiment by brack and colleagues is possible for several reasons1. first, when the resonance frequency of the bar matches the signal frequency, the vibration is amplified — by how much depends on the bar’s quality factor. second, a matched filter is used to reduce most of the background noise. third, the set-up was installed in a laboratory in the swiss alps — a very quiet and temperature-stable environment — and much care was taken to avoid parasitic forces from electricity or seismic coupling. finally, the experiment is conducted at 42.6 hz, meaning it is less prone to seismic noise compared to experiments with torsion balances that measure in the millihertz range. the extremely small bending amplitudes of the receiver beam were then measured with three laser interferometers, combined with a so-called phase-locking technique.the experiment yielded a mean value for newton’s gravitational constant that is 2.2% higher than the value recommended by the committee on data for science and technology with a preliminary estimated relative uncertainty of 1.7%. a more accurate determination is a significant challenge, because dimensional metrology of the metal beams is difficult — as is the accurate determination of tiny vibration amplitudes of 25 pm. furthermore, by varying the distance between the beams, brack and colleagues were even able to verify newton’s inverse square law1.their experiment is entering into unknown territory for verifying newton’s law of gravitation — an important path to follow towards a more complete understanding of gravitation.brack, t. et al. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01642-8 (2022).article google scholar codata internationally recommended values of the fundamental physical constants: 2018 (nist); https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/constants/index.html, 2019schäppi, g. f. et al. j. allergy clin. immunol. 100, 656–661 (1997).article google scholar li, q. et al. nature 560, 582–588 (2018).ads article google scholar quinn, t. nature 505, 455–455 (2014).ads article google scholar rothleitner, c. & schlamminger, s. rev. sci. instrum. 88, 111101 (2017).ads article google scholar cavendish, h. phil. trans. r. soc. 88, 469–526 (1798).article google scholar weber, j. phys. rev. 117, 306–313 (1960).ads mathscinet article google scholar saulson, p. r. physics of gravitational wave detection: resonant and interferometric detectors (univ. syracuse,1998); https://www.slac.stanford.edu/gen/meeting/ssi/1998/media/saulson.pdfdownload referencesphysikalisch-technische bundesanstalt (ptb), division of mechanics and acoustics, braunschweig, germanychristian rothleitneryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to christian rothleitner.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsrothleitner, c. good vibrations. nat. phys. 18, 856–857 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01646-4download citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01646-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 