the boundaries of chromatin domains have an important role in genome organization and regulation. a comprehensive genetic dissection of a domain boundary in vivo provides insights into how boundary elements function and cooperate to mediate insulation between chromatin domains.you have full access to this article via your institution.vertebrate genomes are organized into topologically associating domains (tads), which are often demarcated by boundary regions that contain clustered ctcf-binding sites (cbss)1,2. tads are formed by a process of loop extrusion, in which cohesin molecules slide along the chromatin fiber and extrude loops, until halted by cbss in opposing orientations3,4. because interactions between enhancers and their target genes are usually constrained within tads5,6, disruptions of domain boundaries can result in aberrant gene expression patterns and cause developmental disorders7,8. despite their importance, the principles by which boundary regions function remain largely unknown9,10. in a study in this issue of nature genetics, anania et al.11 functionally dissect a domain boundary that consists of a cluster of cbss by generating a comprehensive set of mouse models in which they quantify insulation, gene expression and disease-related phenotypes.the authors focus on a150-kb boundary region located between the epha4 and pax3 genes. they have previously shown that a large deletion (delb), which includes the epha4 gene and the boundary, causes ectopic interactions between the epha4 enhancers and the pax3 gene, resulting in upregulation of pax3 in developing limbs and brachydactyly (shortening of index and thumb fingers)7. a smaller deletion (delbs), which includes the epha4 gene but leaves the boundary region intact, has no significant effect on gene expression or limb formation7. the delbs model therefore provides an informative system to systematically dissect the function of a boundary region, as it allows the authors to quantify the effects of boundary perturbations on a target gene that is responsive to ectopic enhancer activation and can induce developmental defects when mis-expressed.the epha4–pax3 boundary region contains two cbss in forward (f) orientation and four cbss in reverse (r) orientation (fig. 1). using capture hi-c experiments in delbs limbs, the authors show that the epha–pax3 boundary forms strong interactions with the opposite boundaries of the neighboring centromeric tad (containing the epha4 enhancers) and telomeric tad (containing the pax3 gene) (fig. 1a).the centromeric tad and loop are shown on the left; the telomeric tad and loop are shown on the right. a, delbs model. b, δr1+f2 model. c, δf-all model. d, δr-all model. e, δf-inv model. f, δall model.to investigate how the six cbss function and cooperate to establish a strong boundary, the authors generated 14 transgenic mouse models that contain homozygous deletions and inversions of one or more cbss. gene expression analyses in developing limbs in the models with individual cbs deletions show no effect of deleting the r2, r3 or r4 cbss and a mild (~1.5-fold) upregulation of pax3 in the δr1, δf1 and δf2 models. interestingly, r1, f1 and f2 are the cbss with the strongest cohesin occupancy.to further investigate the function of these cbss, the authors generated double deletions of r1 and f2 (δr1+f2) and f1 and f2 (δf-all). characterization of the δr1+f2 model shows increased inter-tad interactions and 6-fold upregulation of pax3 expression (fig. 1b). the relatively strong effect on gene expression in comparison to the individual deletions suggests that the cbss in the epha4–pax3 boundary region can compensate for each other’s absence and are partially redundant. this is supported by analysis of the δf-all model, in which insulation between tads is more strongly reduced and pax3 expression is 9-fold upregulated (fig. 1c). as expected, deletion of both forward cbss leads to a complete loss of the telomeric loop. notably, the authors also observe decreased strength of the centromeric loop in the δf-all model, which indicates that the forward cbss are involved in the formation of this loop in a non-convergent manner. to confirm this, the authors generated a δr-all model in which all reverse cbss are deleted. characterization of this model shows mild effects on insulation and a 3-fold upregulation of gene expression (fig. 1d). as predicted, the centromeric loop is (partly) maintained in the absence of all reverse cbss, confirming its dependence on the remaining forward cbss. the authors propose that the forward cbss form the non-convergent centromeric loop via a mechanism of loop interference. in this model, ‘bulky’ cohesin–ctcf complexes at the forward cbss that are part of the convergent telomeric loop form steric obstacles for cohesin molecules sliding in from the centromeric side, resulting in the formation of paired non-convergent and convergent loops. analyses of bidirectional loops in available hi-c data provide additional support for this hypothesis.to further test the effect of orientation and genomic context, the authors inverted the epha4–pax3 boundary region in the δf-all model to generate the δf-all-inv model, in which the remaining cbss are in a forward orientation. this results in restoration of the telomeric loop and loss of the centromeric loop (fig. 1e). however, boundary strength and pax3 expression are similar to the δf-all model, which demonstrates that the orientation of the epha4–pax3 boundary is not a major determinant of its function as an insulator.finally, the authors deleted all cbss of the epha4–pax3 boundary (δall), which caused fusion of the tads and strong (>20-fold) upregulation of pax3 in developing limbs (fig. 1f). the authors also assessed limb morphology in a selection of their mouse models. comparisons across these models show a quantitative correlation between boundary strength, gene expression changes and severity of the brachydactyly phenotype.the set of transgenic mouse models generated in this study cover a range of informative configurations of cbss within the epha4–pax3 boundary, which enable the authors to infer principles of how cbss function and cooperate within a boundary region. several models display shifts in the patterns of cohesin enrichment and loop anchors after deletion of cbss in the boundary region. these compensatory effects indicate (partial) redundancy of clustered cbss to ensure robust domain insulation. furthermore, the models show that the number of cbss and orientation within the boundary region cannot explain the severity of their phenotypes, which is particularly evident when comparing the δf-all, δr-all and δf-all-inv models. the authors propose that the characteristics of individual cbss are more important for the function of the epha4–pax3 boundary and show that the most functional cbss generally have the highest level of cohesin occupancy. although the properties of individual cbss that determine their ability to efficiently stall cohesin remain a topic for further investigation, this elegant study provides valuable insights into the regulatory logic of a boundary region.nora, e. p. et al. nature 485, 381–385 (2012).cas article google scholar dixon, j. r. et al. nature 485, 376–380 (2012).cas article google scholar fudenberg, g. et al. cell rep. 15, 2038–2049 (2016).cas article google scholar sanborn, a. l. et al. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 112, e6456–e6465 (2015).cas pubmed pubmed central google scholar shen, y. et al. nature 488, 116–120 (2012).cas article google scholar symmons, o. et al. genome res. 24, 390–400 (2014).cas article google scholar lupiáñez, d. g. et al. cell 161, 1012–1025 (2015).article google scholar franke, m. et al. nature 538, 265–269 (2016).cas article google scholar oudelaar, a. m. & higgs, d. r. nat. rev. genet. 22, 154–168 (2021).cas article google scholar mirny, l. & dekker, j. cold spring harb. perspect. biol. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a040147 (2021).article google scholar anania, c. et al. nat. genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01117-9 (2022).article google scholar download referencesmax planck institute for multidisciplinary sciences, göttingen, germanya. marieke oudelaaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to a. marieke oudelaar.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsoudelaar, a.m. deciphering the regulatory logic of a chromatin domain boundary. nat genet 54, 914–915 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01086-zdownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01086-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 