hello nature readers, would you like to get this briefing in your inbox free every day? sign up herewastewater samples could help to detect new sars-cov-2 variants early.credit: arnold jerocki/gettyfor the first time, scientists detected specific sars-cov-2 variants in sewage weeks before they showed up in testing clinics. researchers in california developed a method that uses nanobeads to boost the amount of detectable viral rna in a wastewater sample. scientists spent nearly a year testing the approach at a sewage-treatment plant that treats effluent from around 2.3 million people. they found the alpha, delta and omicron variants up to two weeks before the strains were detected in tests in clinics. the technique could eventually be used to track emerging variants and speed up the public-health response, says microbiologist and co-author rob knight.nature | 4 min readreference: nature paperfellow space telescope fans, it’s happening. the big reveal of the james webb space telescope’s first full-colour images is still scheduled for tomorrow, 12 july. but us president joe biden is apparently just as impatient as the rest of us and will release one image from the treasure trove today, 11 july, at 21:00 utc (that’s 5 p.m. eastern time and 10 p.m. gmt). i’ll be grabbing my popcorn and watching the nasa livestream — see you there.the images come following some surprising micrometeoroid strikes to the telescope. although mission scientists expected the webb to be dinged by these tiny bits of space dust over its anticipated 20-year lifetime, a relatively large hit in may has caused them to re-evaluate what they thought they knew about how often webb will be pelted. thankfully, the telescope’s performance is unharmed, and its mirrors can be adjusted to compensate for damage.nature | 5 min readresearchers are struggling to investigate a deadly earthquake and its aftershocks in a remote area of afghanistan. the magnitude-5.9 quake struck close to the pakistan border on 22 june and killed more than 1,000 people. the region has few seismic-monitoring stations, and security concerns have stopped scientists from visiting the area. typically, an earthquake of that magnitude would not kill people, but the combination of the region’s vulnerable buildings and the quake’s shallow depth proved deadly, say scientists.nature | 5 min reada large genomic analysis of salmonella typhi, the bacterium that causes typhoid, has found that antibiotic-resistant strains have spread out of south asia close to 200 times since 1990. the prevalence of multidrug-resistant s. typhi has declined in bangladesh and india since 2000, and remains low in nepal, but has increased in pakistan. every year, up to 161,000 people die of the bacterial infection, which spreads through contaminated water and can cause prolonged fever and diarrhoea.scidev.net | 4 min readreference: the lancet microbe paperthe three years of uk prime minister boris johnson’s government were characterized by a shocking and persistent disregard for rules, for the truth and for expert evidence, argues a nature editorial. his resignation now offers glimmers of hope for researchers, if his successor reverses course on some of his policies. the government must cease its damaging and ill-considered fights with the scholarly community, says the editorial. it has to stop undermining the autonomy of universities. political obstacles to uk access to european union (eu) research funding must be rapidly removed. and a sea change is needed in the united kingdom’s overall relationship with its european partners.nature | 5 min readtime to ditch your dozen browser tabs or stack of unread print-outs? biomedical scientist maya gosztyla decided to rethink her approach to research papers after she had trouble keeping track of the published literature. now she harnesses rss feeds, a reference-management tool and a note-taking app, and she sets time aside for reading.nature | 5 min readin this podcast extra, two nature physics gurus — senior reporter lizzie gibney and federico levi, a senior physics editor for the journal — look back to the discovery of the higgs boson ten years ago. they reminisce about their experiences of its discovery, what the latest run of the large hadron collider might reveal about the particle's properties and what role it could have in science beyond the standard model of particle physics.nature podcast | 22 min listensubscribe to the nature podcast on apple podcasts, google podcasts or spotify.