electricity and magnetism are inextricably linked by the physics that laid the foundation for the rapid industrial progress of the late nineteenth century. studies at the level of atoms and electrons have revealed that such coupling can occur even in a single material, known as a multiferroic material, in which electric and magnetic ordering can coexist. such materials might one day be used to build a computer that combines electronic logic with magnetic memory. but this technology requires efficient switching — electric control of the material’s magnetization or magnetic control of its electric polarization — and that is difficult to achieve. writing in nature, ponet et al.1 report a magnetic-field-induced mechanism for switching electric polarization that is driven by the topology of the material. read the paper: topologically protected magnetoelectric switching in a multiferroicconventional ferroelectricity occurs when the displacement of polar ions in a material results in spontaneous electric polarization. in ‘electronic ferroelectric’ materials, the polarization instead arises from interactions between electrons. electronic ferroelectricity can develop in chemical compounds of the form rmn2o5, where r represents one of the rare-earth elements, such as gadolinium (gd), paired with manganese oxide2. electrons associated with mn4+ and mn3+ ions in the material interact antiferromagnetically, meaning that their intrinsic angular momenta (spins) are aligned, but in an antiparallel manner. the magnetic ordering leads to a tiny displacement in the positions of the atoms3, which gives rise to a net electric polarization. this type of magnetoelectric coupling is known as symmetric exchange striction4,5.magnetism and ferroelectricity have been studied previously in many rmn2o5 compounds, and these investigations suggest that the manganese ions are arranged in two antiferromagnetic chains. ponet et al. measured the changes in magnetization and electric polarization of single crystals of gdmn2o5 under magnetic fields of various strengths and orientations, and at different temperatures. they found that, at temperatures below 5 kelvin, they could drive a transition through four distinct magnetic configurations (states) by increasing and decreasing the magnetic field strength (fig. 1a). as the field was increased, the electric polarization did not change appreciably. however, when the authors decreased the magnetic field strength, the new configuration induced a reversal of the electric polarization.figure 1 | a four-state electric polarization switch. ponet et al.1 measured the electric polarization of gadolinium manganese oxide under a magnetic field of increasing and decreasing strength, applied at different angles. a, at a ‘magic’ angle of around 10°, the system cycled through four magnetic configurations, maintaining electric polarization of the same sign (measured in microcouloumbs per square centimetre) as the field strength (measured in tesla) increased, and switching polarization as it decreased. (adapted from fig. 2d of ref. 1.) b, the field affects the direction of the intrinsic angular momentum (spin, shown as arrows) of electrons in the manganese ions. as the magnetic field strength increases, all spins undergo a 90° rotation, followed by another 90° rotation as the field decreases. however, depending on their position in the material, half of the manganese spins (dark grey) toggle between two states, with the other half (pale grey) making a full 360° rotation, switching the electric polarization, as the field is increased and decreased twice. the resulting configurations (1–4) reflect the different states (1–4) inferred from ponet and colleagues’ polarization measurements in a.this effect was observable only within a range of magnetic field angles of around 10° relative to the orientation of the single crystals, a value termed the magic angle. at angles smaller than the magic angle, the system switched between two states, instigating a change in polarization; and at angles larger than the magic angle, there was a two-state switch that did not affect the polarization. the existence of these two extreme cases turns out to be crucial to allowing the four-state switch.at high temperatures, the spins of gdmn2o5 point in random directions, changing continuously, so that there is no net magnetic order. as a sample is cooled below a critical temperature (typically around dozens of kelvin), the manganese spins order first, followed by the gadolinium spins, which align only when the temperature drops to a few kelvin. this difference makes the magnetization process complicated, because the gadolinium ions interfere with the interactions between the manganese ions and with the external field, inducing a preferred axis along which the manganese spins align. at high temperatures, the switching behaviour disappears, because thermal fluctuations destroy the ordering between gadolinium ions, thus relieving the manganese ions of their preferred alignment. electric and magnetic domains inverted by a magnetic fieldthe gadolinium spins align with the manganese chain with which they are most strongly coupled. as the magnetic field strength is increased, all of the spins undergo a 90° rotation; they undergo another 90° rotation as the field is decreased (fig. 1b). if the field is aligned with the magic angle, then, depending on their position relative to the gadolinium ions, half of the manganese spins will toggle back to their original state, and the other half will swing the other way — switching the polarization, and eventually making a full 360° rotation as the field is increased and decreased twice. the team considered this effect to be analogous to that of a crankshaft, converting linear changes in the magnetic field, which acts as a piston, into a rotation of the spins, which acts as a driveshaft.the authors complemented their measurements with a minimal model to explain how the four-state cycle could arise in terms of the topology of the system. the model is phenomenological, which means that it describes the behaviour of the vector characterizing the macroscopic order, rather than the behaviour of each atom. this trade-off makes the model easier to simulate, but also makes it difficult to determine the most appropriate model parameters. however, the authors’ experiments contained clues to how suitable values might be estimated.the energy of the system is reminiscent of a two-state model introduced nearly 40 years ago6, which helps to elucidate how the two-state and four-state magnetoelectric switches differ. specifically, they have a different ‘winding number’. this is a topological measure characterizing trajectories through two-dimensional parameter space — in this case, describing the possible orientations of each chain of manganese ions. the two-state switch has a winding number of 0, whereas the winding number of the four-state switch is 1. in this system, the non-zero winding number means that as long as the high- and low-angle cases exist, there will always be a range of angles between them in which it is possible for the system to move between the various two-state scenarios, thus creating a four-state switch.the physics of crankshaft switching will no doubt inspire further research, and with a deeper understanding of the intrinsic mechanism behind ponet and colleagues’ results, it might even be possible to realize practical devices on this basis. single-crystal samples of higher quality than those reported here might be achievable using a technique known as the optical floating zone7. and related materials within and outside the rmn2o5 family8,9 could be explored for their propensity to show strong magnetoelectric coupling — perhaps even at room temperature.