the ability to create complex three-dimensional structures of light has reached new heights with the experimental observation of two distinct kinds of toroidal pulses, the optical analogue of smoke rings.you have full access to this article via your institution.smoke rings are fascinating three-dimensional (3d) structures that correspond to a particular class of solutions of the navier–stokes equations, which underpin the physics of fluid dynamics1. the role of smoke here is just that of making the air motion visible, and such ring structures can form in free air or in other fluids as well. similar structures, commonly known as bubble rings, are, for example, formed in water. the shape of these rings is akin to that of the surface of a donut, or as more formally called in mathematics a ‘torus’. a torus is a 3d surface that is generated by combining two circular motions: a single large circle (toroidal coordinate), centred around the main torus axis, and a set of smaller circles (poloidal coordinate), perpendicular to the first and centred around the various points of the large circle. in smoke or bubble rings, the fluid flow follows the lines of the small circles, while the overall torus structure propagates along the axis of the large circle. this fluid motion circulates as a vortex around a ‘core’ circular line singularity, where fluid velocity vanishes.the generation of isolated tori of the electromagnetic field in free space is now reported for the first time in nature photonics, in two separate independent papers by research groups in the uk and china2,3. although both demonstrate torus-like topologies of the electromagnetic field, these two works are actually very different from each other as they focus on distinct properties of light that are used to define the toroidal shape, as we will now discuss in more detail.in the first paper, apostolos zdagkas and colleagues from the university of southampton focus on the polarization of light, that is on the vectorial nature of the electric (or magnetic) field2. the structure that zdagkas et al. create can be visualized as a torus made of electric (or magnetic) field lines. two configurations are possible, labelled as tm and te respectively. in tm configuration, the electric field lines are topologically equivalent to the small circles of the torus (with some deformation), that is, they span the ‘poloidal’ coordinate just as for the case of fluid motion of smoke rings (fig. 1a), while the magnetic field circulates along the orthogonal large-circle ‘toroidal’ coordinate. the electric field decreases inside the torus surface, vanishing completely on the central circular line singularity, just as in the case of smoke rings. in te configuration the structures of electric and magnetic fields are swapped.a,b, field-line toroidal pulses2. in this case, a family of adjacent electric-field-lines (for tm configuration) of given distance from the optical axis defines a toroidal surface (a). an x–z cross-section of the pulse shows multiple field-line families with varying distance from the axis (b). on the optical axis, the field is non-zero and purely longitudinal. c,d, phase-vortex toroidal pulses3. in this case, the phase of the field amplitude (here encoded in false colours), varies by 2𝜋 when going around the surface of the torus along a poloidal coordinate (line arrows in c), hence locally forming a spatio-temporal optical vortex (stov), with vanishing field on axis. the stov axis, that is, the vortex line, is in turn bent into a closed ring, thus giving rise to the torus structure (c). an x–z cross-section shows two opposite-sign stovs corresponding to the opposite sides of the torus (d).an approximately isolated torus of field lines, akin to that sketched in fig. 1a,b, was demonstrated experimentally by zdagkas et al. in the terahertz domain, in the form of a broadband electromagnetic pulse having just about one oscillation period in the focus-waist region of the beam. due to propagation, far from the focus the same electromagnetic pulse changes into what can be interpreted as a double torus sharing a central ‘side’, that is, with one and a half field oscillations. another solution in which the focal region has approximately one and a half oscillations (double torus) and the far field has a single torus is also possible. in the optical domain, due to technical constraints, zdagkas and colleagues only demonstrate a train of multiple concatenated tori corresponding to the field oscillations, each wavelength containing two adjacent tori sharing one side and having opposite circulation of the field lines.how are these toroidal structures of electromagnetic field lines actually generated? the overall approach is similar to that used for generating radially polarized fields, also known as radial vector-vortex beams. in any single plane perpendicular to propagation direction, a radial-polarization field is described by a set of straight field lines ‘radiating’ out of the origin. these field lines are hence purely two-dimensional. however, if you consider another plane that is translated half a wavelength forward (or backward) along propagation direction, you will have the same radial field structure but with the opposite sign, hence the radial field lines are now converging toward the centre, rather than radiating out. now the described transverse field geometry ignores the presence of longitudinal fields, which are small but unavoidable in finite beams4. in particular, from maxwell’s equations we know that in vacuum all field lines must be solenoidal, thereby generally describing closed loops. hence, the first plane of diverging radial lines described above is actually always ‘linked’ to the second plane of converging lines by means of longitudinal fields, which turn most field lines into closed loops. the set of all field lines of these radially polarized beams is hence always topologically toroidal. however, it should be noted that these field-line tori have generally non-circular cross-sections (fig. 1b), as they are only wavelength-long in the longitudinal direction, while the transverse extension coincides with the full beam radius.all methods for generating radial polarizations (for example, metasurfaces or q-plates) can work in principle, and structures composed of multiple connected adjacent tori of the optical field (with alternating orientation of field lines) have been therefore likely produced in many past experiments dealing with radial polarization, although the existence of such 3d structures in the field was not explicitly discussed to our knowledge. yet, we think that stable isolated travelling tori or even multiple-tori trains of electromagnetic fields have been clearly demonstrated for the first time only now by zdagkas et al. indeed, ensuring propagation stability of the described field structures also requires adding a careful design of the field space-variant spectral components to the polarization manipulation ordinarily used to obtain the radial field, thus synthesizing the correct spatio-temporal dependence of the electromagnetic pulses. a complex set of characterizations was also needed to prove that the generated pulses indeed correspond to the planned toroidal structures.in the second paper3, chenhao wan and colleagues from university of shanghai for science and technology focus instead on manipulating the optical phase of light, without considering polarization explicitly (the polarization can be considered as roughly uniform in the generated structures). they build upon the work that the same group has reported few years ago5, in which spatio-temporal optical vortex (stov) pulses in free space were demonstrated for the first time (see also ref. 6 for prior work on stov generated in nonlinear media). optical vortices are field structures in which the phase of light varies by 2𝜋 (or an integer multiple of 2𝜋) while going around a central axis. in ordinary optical vortices, this central axis is parallel to propagation direction, so that the phase structure is entirely developed in a transverse plane7. in a stov pulse, instead, the optical phase of the electromagnetic field amplitude varies by 2𝜋 while going around an axis that is perpendicular to the propagation direction (we stress that this phase is that of the field amplitude, hence it does not include the plane-wave phase factor associated with forward propagation). as such, this phase variation develops in a plane that is spanned by a single transverse coordinate combined with the longitudinal coordinate, parallel to propagation direction and hence also corresponding to time (owing to the continuous propagation of the pulse). these stov can be generated using a spatio-temporal pulse-shaping technique that exploits a spatial light modulator (slm) in combination with the fourier-transforming action of lenses5.what wan et al. now added is a further stage of optical manipulation of their stov pulses by means of two properly distanced phase elements that, together, implement a ‘cartesian to log-polar’ coordinate (conformal) transformation8. in this manipulation, stov pulses are first stretched in the direction of their vortex axis and then their axis is bent within the transverse plane until it closes on itself, forming a ring. the end result is that the stov turns into an isolated vortex torus. as shown in fig. 1c, here what actually spans the poloidal (small-circles) coordinate of the torus is the set of lines that are everywhere perpendicular to the isophase surfaces. the overall generated structure is that of a torus having much larger size than the field-line tori discussed in the first paper, as both the phase modulation of the stov and the circular vortex ring extend over relatively large distances relative to the wavelength, with an aspect ratio that could also be easily balanced so as to obtain truly circular tori cross-sections. the field vanishes in the interior of the torus, that is at the vortex core ring, again akin to the behavior of smoke rings. hints of similar structures spontaneously formed in nonlinear media had been reported in ref. 6. wan and colleagues in their paper also argue theoretically that the generated structure can be a stable solution of the wave propagation equation in a medium having anomalous dispersion. in normal-dispersion media, such as vacuum or air, the toroidal vortex solution will instead get deformed during propagation, although this only occurs over significant propagation distances.in conclusion, we believe that the accomplishments reported in these two works together represent an important milestone in the path to achieve full control of the electromagnetic field in three-dimensions, a major goal in the emerging field of structured light9. besides their intrinsic interest for fundamental science, these toroidal electromagnetic field structures may also be important for spectroscopic applications, as they should selectively couple to toroidal (or anapole) moments of materials10, and they will likely give rise to new complex phenomena of light–matter interaction. the first ‘smoke rings of light’ have been blown.shariff, k. & leonard, a. annu. rev. fluid. mech. 24, 235–279 (1992).ads article google scholar zdagkas, a. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01028-5 (2022).article google scholar wan, c., cao, q., chen, j., chong, a. & zhan, q. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01013-y (2022).article google scholar cardano, f. & marrucci, l. nat. photon. 15, 72–74 (2021).ads article google scholar chong, a., wan, c., chen, j. & zhan, q. nat. photon. 14, 350–354 (2020).ads article google scholar jhajj, n. et al. phys. rev. x 6, 031037 (2016). google scholar nye, j. f. & berry, m. v. proc. r. soc. lond. a 336, 165–190 (1974).ads article google scholar berkhout, g. c. et al. phys. rev. lett. 105, 153601 (2010).ads article google scholar rubinsztein-dunlop, h. et al. j. opt. 19, 013001 (2017).ads article google scholar papasimakis, n. et al. nat. mater. 15, 263–271 (2016).ads article google scholar download referencesphysics department ettore pancini of università di napoli federico ii, compl, univ. di monte s. angelo, napoli, italyfilippo cardano & lorenzo marrucciyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lorenzo marrucci.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionscardano, f., marrucci, l. smoke rings of light. nat. photon. 16, 476–477 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01032-9download citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01032-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 