ferroelectric domain switching controlled by electrical pulses provides a controllable means to tune the refractive index of batio3 thin films. now, a device based on this material is presented that is capable of implementing low-power, high-speed and cmos-compatible programmable phase shifters in silicon photonic chips.you have full access to this article via your institution.just like transistors in microelectronic chips, optical phase shifters (ops) play a key role as the fundamental building block in photonic integrated circuits (pics)1. while electronics is digital and operates with voltage or current signals, photonics is analogue and operates with amplitude and phase of lightwave signals. ops controlled by electronic signals and embedded in interferometers can carry out dynamic modulation and switching tasks2.emerging applications with a voracious appetite for ever-increasing computing and processing speed, such as 5g communications, neuromorphic computing, and data centres are demanding the scaling-up in the complexity of silicon photonic chips. whether application-specific3 or general-purpose and programmable4 their architectures will need to accommodate hundreds to thousands of ops. this implies meeting stringent technology and operation requirements that include: low power consumption (ideally non-volatile operation or <1 mw power consumption per π phase shift for volatile operation), fast response (<10–9–10–6 s), reduced footprint (<50 μm per element), low losses (2 db cm–1) and cmos compatibility. several design approaches and technologies have been developed, which feature complementary properties as shown in fig. 1a. thermo-optic phase shifters (tops)5 operate by modifying the refractive index of the waveguide by means of local change of temperature due to resistive heating. they are the easiest to integrate on silicon but feature moderate consumption, footprint, and very slow response times. furthermore, although power consumption can be reduced by substrate undercut, this comes at the expense of bandwidth reduction. microelectromechanical (mems) phase shifters6 provide phase shifting by the mechanical moving of internal parts. they offer a reduced footprint and very low crosstalk, but the multilevel non-volatile operation has not been demonstrated yet and requires high-level operation voltages not compatible with cmos technology. fast ops can be achieved either by means of leveraging on the plasma effect of carrier accumulation or extraction in silicon pin junctions7 or by means of exploiting the pockels effect by incorporating either iii–v (sige) or electro-optic thin-film material layers (linbo3 or batio3) on silicon8. plasma dispersion ops can be very fast, are cmos compatible, but are volatile and produce additional absorption losses coupled to the phase-shifting operation, a feature that is also present in non-volatile ops based on phase change materials (pcm)9. linbo3 pockels phase shifters are fast, but their losses are considerable, and footprints are in the mm range. in essence, there appears to be no solution that can simultaneously accommodate all the desired features for an ops.adapted from ref. 10, springer nature ltd.a, comparison between different technologies for the implementation of ops. b, batio3 on silicon ops structure reported by geler-kremer and colleagues10. c, refractive index change by domain switching. d. illustration of the internal process of a domain switching.now, geler-kremer and colleagues report10 in nature photonics a design for a non-volatile ops based on the pockels effect that has the potential to overcome most of the challenges and requirements demanded of these devices for large-scale integrated photonic circuits. in particular, the ultralow state-switching energy per pulse (4.6–27 pj) coupled with activation pulse durations in the nanosecond to microsecond range opens the door to <1 μw power consumption per π phase shift and therefore to overall power consumptions due to pic programming of less than 1 w for chips with over 1 million ops.the phase shifter, which is fully compatible with silicon photonics, is based on the stabilization of ferroelectric domain states in batio3 thin films embedded in compact waveguides as shown in fig. 1b. in addition to exhibiting a stronger pockels effect11 (over 50 times higher) as compared to linbo3, its effective value can be tuned by changing the ferroelectric domain configuration by means of pulsed electrical control signals. this ferroelectric domain switching is shown in fig. 1c and happens when the polarization of a ferroelectric domain aligns with an applied electric field along with one of the two possible polarization axes. the internal process within a domain, shown in fig. 1d, is commenced by a nucleation stage where a domain with opposite polarization is created and is followed by a growth of the new domain through the movement of its walls. it can be fully controlled by a set of three independent parameters, the magnitude of the applied electrical field pulse, its duration, and the number of repeated pulses.a key finding and development of this paper due to its important practical importance is the successful demonstration of multi-state non-volatile and fully reversible operation, which allows for the setting of eight different values (3-bit precision) of the silicon waveguide refractive index. other distinctive features of the proposed configuration are the fast-switching times (1 ns to 1 μs), its stability demonstrated over periods of ten hours, its negligible absorption coupled to the phase-shifting operation, its reduced insertion loss (0.07 db), and the cmos-compatible voltage levels for the operating pulses (1–2 v).for a widespread introduction into complex photonic integrated circuits, there are four main challenges that need to be addressed. the first one is footprint reduction. in their report, geler-kremer and colleagues acknowledge that with the current approach a π phase shift would require a 1 mm ops footprint, which is not practical for chip scaling-up. a reduction factor of at least 20 is necessary to reach a state-of-the-art figure. a second challenge resides in avoiding the need to reset the ops phase shifter state each time that a new configuration needs to be programmed (unless it is incremental). these resets may cause extra delays in the chip programming. a third challenge is connected to the phase precision that can be achieved. this is especially important in applications such as neuromorphic and photonic computing, where errors can accumulate, hampering fidelity due to phase imprecision. for example, the reported value is 3 bits for 0.15π (0.018π precision), yet a state-of-the-art precision of 0.01π would require 6 bits precision for a full scale of π. last, but not least, repeatable results with different devices grown on the same wafer is also mandatory as this will avoid a considerable burden caused by the need of producing individual and specialized calibration curves for each ops.if these issues are successfully addressed and solved we are, no doubt, in the presence of a disruptive cmos-compatible solution that will enable the scaling-up of next-generation large-scale complex silicon photonic integrated chips featuring extremely low power consumption, fast programming response, and reduced footprint. applications to field-programmable photonic gate arrays, deep-learning, neuromorphic application-specific circuits, and analogue photonic in-memory computers will greatly benefit from it.su, y., zhang, y., qiu, c., guo, x. & sun, l. adv. mater. technol. 5, 1901153 (2020).article google scholar rahim, a. et al. ieee j. sel. top. quantum electron. 25, 1–18 (2019).article google scholar shen, y. et al. nat. photon. 11, 441–446 (2017).ads article google scholar bogaerts, w. et al. nature 586, 207–216 (2020).ads article google scholar liu, s. et al. front. optoelectron. 15, 9 (2022).article google scholar quack, n. et al. ieee j. quantum electron. 56, 1–10 (2020).article google scholar reed, g. t. et al. nanophotonics 3, 229–245 (2014).article google scholar he, m. et al. nat. photon. 13, 359–364 (2019).ads article google scholar stegmaier, m., ríos, c., bhaskaran, h., wright, c. d. & pernice, w. h. p. adv. opt. mater. 5, 1–6 (2017).article google scholar geler-kremer, j. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01003-0 (2022).article google scholar abel, s. et al. nat. mater. 18, 42–47 (2019).ads article google scholar download referencesuniversitat politècnica de valència and ipronics programmable photonics, valencia, spainjosé capmanyipronics programmable photonics, valencia, spaindaniel pérez-lópezyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to josé capmany.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionscapmany, j., pérez-lópez, d. a new change of phase. nat. photon. 16, 479–480 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01030-xdownload citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01030-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 