one hundred years ago, in 1922, léon brillouin discovered the scattering of light by sound waves. within an optical fibre, brillouin scattering may be used to create narrow-linewidth filters and spectrometers. a twisted optical fibre is now used to reduce these linewidths by over an order of magnitude, down to the sub-mhz level.you have full access to this article via your institution.filtering the spectrum of light is a key functionality in optical technologies, such as spectrometers, narrow-band lasers, and wavelength combiners. in traditional optical filters, the spectral linewidth is limited by residual losses, which are hard to suppress below a certain level — especially when compact photonic structures are required. one approach to surpass such a limit is to explore the long lifetime of acoustic waves. this is a well-established technology for filtering and timing of radio-frequency electromagnetic waves, in which piezo-electricity is used to bridge the electrical and acoustic domains.with optical waves, this bridge is possible due to photoelasticity, which translates mechanical strain into refractive index modulation and is the physical effect behind brillouin scattering of light. in summary, brillouin scattering occurs when an optical wave scatters off the refractive index grating induced by the mechanical strain of acoustic waves. when two optical waves counter-propagate along an optical fibre the acoustic waves may be driven by the optical beating between them and lead to stimulated brillouin scattering.in standard optical fibres, stimulated brillouin scattering may be used to build optical filters with linewidths down to a few tens of mhz1, which correspond to an optical quality factor of several millions. such high quality factors may be used to create ultra-narrow lasers, improve the signal-to-noise ratio of an optical communication channel, or delay an optical signal for long periods. such high quality factors bring brillouin filters close to high-quality optical microresonators2 or cutting-edge fibre grating filters3. however, such brillouin filters do not rely on geometrically defined optical resonances, thus their central frequency may be continuously swept over a wide range by adjusting the brillouin pump laser frequency.writing in nature photonics, choksi and colleagues explore stimulated brillouin scattering in a twisted-core optical fibre, whose birefringence axis is spun along the fibre length4. they demonstrate a sub-mhz spectral dip whose frequency, width and depth are tunable. compared with traditional stimulated brillouin filters, their quality factors reach hundreds of millions, representing a two-orders-of-magnitude reduction in the spectral linewidth — without relying on an optically resonant structure where tunable lasers are frequently needed. the uniqueness of such an ultra-narrow dip follows from the interplay between the strong frequency dependence of the twisted fibre polarization states and the very large brillouin gain achievable in optical fibres.the use of stimulated brillouin scattering to enable optical filters is well known, and optical spectrum analysers based on this technology are commercially available. the most usual form of stimulated brillouin scattering employs a pump laser (at the frequency ωp and wavenumber βp) that counter-propagates with a signal (ωs, βs) through an optical fibre (fig. 1a). the beating between the frequency-shifted counter-propagating beams creates an intensity pattern that induces optical forces that can drive acoustic waves due to electrostriction (the converse of photoelasticity). the counter-propagation is important to ensure momentum conservation and efficiency of this inelastic scattering process, leading to acoustic waves with frequency ω = ωp – ωs and wavenumber βac ≈ 2βp (fig. 1a).a, schematic of a filter based on stimulated brillouin scattering. a pump with frequency and wavenumber (ωp, βp) counter-propagates with a signal (ωs = ωp–ω,βs) and they exchange energy through an acoustic wave (ω, βac). the acoustic frequency is given by ω = 2βpυac; at telecom wavelengths (λ = 1,550 nm) and silica fibre (υac = 5,960 ms–1) the acoustic wave oscillates roughly at ω/2π = 11 ghz. b, brillouin gain (in log-scale) versus the pump-signal frequency offset (ω = ωp–ωs). the dashed magenta (green) line represents the co(orthogonally)-polarized signal gain. the black solid curve shows the gain profile for the twisted-fibre polarization. the narrow dip observed by choksi et al. is caused by the strong frequency dependence of the twisted fibre polarization eigenstates; when ωs = ωp – ω, the signal experiences the weak orthogonal polarization gain (green dashed curve), and when is slightly detuned from this frequency (ωs = ωp – ω – δ) it is amplified by the large co-polarization gain (dashed magenta curve). c, at a signal frequency matching the gain dip (purple marker in b), pump and signal excite orthogonal elliptical polarization eigenmodes of the twisted fibre, which remain orthogonal through the fibre, leading to a very weak signal gain. d, at a slightly different signal frequency (orange marker in b), the pump and signal do not excite the orthogonal polarization eigenmodes, thus polarization pulling leads to a large signal gain.when the pump-signal frequency detuning is positive, ωp – ωs > 0, the optically driven acoustic wave is amplified and leads to strong scattering of the pump, which is doppler-shifted by the acoustic frequency and amplifies the lower frequency signal. this frequency-selective gain process effectively filters the signal wave with a bandwidth limited by the lifetime of the acoustic waves.stimulated brillouin scattering has recently gone through a revolution after its demonstration within strongly confining optical waveguides, such as photonic crystal fibres5 and on-chip optical circuits6,7,8. the large brillouin gain reached in such structures increased its appeal for scalable optical processing of radio-frequency signals9 and compact high-purity lasers10. despite this progress, acoustic losses significantly increase at ghz frequencies and beyond, thus setting a lower bound for the linewidth of brillouin-based filters. analogous to purely optical filters, achieving lower linewidth requires a reduction of acoustic dissipation. this can be achieved either by suppressing extrinsic acoustic losses — through the engineering of mechanical wave radiation — or reduction of intrinsic viscosity at low temperatures11.an alternative approach to obtain narrow spectral features, without reducing losses, is to explore coherent wave interactions that are analogous to electromagnetic-induced transparency or absorption. on exploring interference between distinct optical paths, spectral features narrower than the intrinsic linewidth have been demonstrated12. choksi and colleagues investigate a distinct approach to harness ultra-narrow features with brillouin scattering. their work relies on the fact that brillouin scattering, to a great degree, preserves the polarization state of light. thus, the brillouin gain is much stronger when signal and pump waves share the same polarization state, as illustrated by the dashed lines of fig. 1b. polarization-dependent gain induces a polarization pulling effect: if the pump and signal are launched with a slight offset from orthogonally polarized states, the transfer of pump photons to the signal through the amplifier effectively rotates the signal polarization towards the pump. indeed, such a polarization pulling effect has been explored in brillouin-based amplifiers13,14, but in standard optical fibres, the polarization eigenmodes have very mild frequency dependence. in stark contrast, when a birefringent optical fibre is twisted, the resulting elliptically polarized eigenmodes show a steep frequency dependence. when a pump wave at ωp and a signal wave ωs = ωp – ω, are launched in the orthogonal twisted-fibre polarization states, they remain orthogonal through the fibre and the signal does not experience significant optical gain (fig. 1c). as the signal frequency is slightly detuned from the exact acoustic frequency, ωs = ωp – ω – δ, it no longer excites a polarization eigenmode due to their strong frequency dependence. the stimulated brillouin gain then pulls the signal towards the pump and amplifies it (fig. 1d). as the gain is increased by optical pumping, an extremely narrow dip — due to the lack of gain — emerges at the centre of the brillouin spectrum (fig. 1b). thus, tuning of the narrow-dip width can be easily achieved by adjusting the pump power, while its frequency can be tuned by offsetting the pump-signal initial polarization states to ensure orthogonality at another frequency.choksi and colleagues have thus opened a path to explore unique spectral features caused by brillouin gain in twisted media. nonetheless, important technical challenges need to be addressed before such devices can compete with the more mature purely optical filters. like other stimulated brillouin filters, it requires a dedicated tunable pump laser to perform spectral filtering — arguably the major obstacle to the popularity of brillouin-based spectrum analysers. the spectral depth of this peak is limited by residual polarization pulling between the pump and signal. this occurs because the signal and pump frequencies are different, therefore the exact polarization mode orthogonality cannot be perfectly ensured. as a result, when the brillouin gain is significantly increased, polarization pulling also occurs at the spectral dip frequency and reduces its depth.despite the technical challenges that should be overcome to improve the technological readiness level of their ultra-narrow filter, choksi and collaborators put forth a new degree of freedom in the brillouin-based device designs. for instance, adapting this idea to integrated photonic waveguides — with orders-of-magnitude larger brillouin gain — could drastically reduce the overall length of these devices. twisting waveguides that can also confine acoustic waves could also bring a whole new set of possibilities for chiral brillouin scattering, and the first steps in this direction were already given using photonic crystal fibres15,16. finally, it is exciting to celebrate in 2022 the 100th anniversary of the seminal paper by león brillouin17, and yet see novel twists to this century-old problem.marpaung, d. et al. optica 2, 76–83 (2015).ads article google scholar ji, x., roberts, s., corato-zanarella, m. & lipson, m. apl photon. 6, 71101 (2021).article google scholar vigneron, p.-b. et al. opt. lett. 45, 3179–3182 (2020).ads article google scholar choksi, n., liu, y., ghasemi, r. & qian, l. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01015-w (2022).article google scholar dainese, p. et al. nat. phys. 2, 388–392 (2006).article google scholar pant, r. et al. opt. express 19, 8285–8290 (2011).ads article google scholar van laer, r., kuyken, b., van thourhout, d. & baets, r. nat. photon. 9, 199–203 (2015).ads article google scholar kittlaus, e. a., shin, h. & rakich, p. t. nat. photon. 10, 463–467 (2016).ads article google scholar casas-bedoya, a., morrison, b., pagani, m., marpaung, d. & eggleton, b. j. opt. lett. 40, 4154–4157 (2015).ads article google scholar gundavarapu, s. et al. nat. photon. 13, 60–67 (2019).ads article google scholar lifshitz, r. & roukes, m. phys. rev. b 61, 5600–5609 (2000).ads article google scholar a., s. s., yelikar, a. b. & pant, r. commun. phys. 3, 109 (2020).article google scholar zadok, a., zilka, e., eyal, a., thévenaz, l. & tur, m. opt. express 16, 21692–21707 (2008).ads article google scholar shmilovitch, z. et al. opt. express 19, 25873–25880 (2011).ads article google scholar zeng, x. et al. photon. res. 10, 711–718 (2022).article google scholar zeng, x. et al. preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.03680 (2022).brillouin, l. ann. phys. (paris) 9, 88–122 (1922).ads google scholar download referencesuniversity of campinas, sao paulo, brazilthiago alegre & gustavo wiederheckeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to thiago alegre or gustavo wiederhecker.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsalegre, t., wiederhecker, g. a narrow twist. nat. photon. 16, 482–484 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01029-4download citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01029-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 