antibody-mediated delivery of therapeutics has been primarily limited to agents containing amine, alcohol or thiol functional groups. now, an approach has been developed to create stable and bio-reversible prodrugs that mask ortho-quinones. drug release requires both protease activation followed by acid-assisted elimination.you have full access to this article via your institution.one of the biggest challenges with chemotherapy is the relative lack of discrimination between cancer and healthy tissue. one approach to improve the selectivity is to use cancer cell-targeting antibodies that deliver a chemotherapeutic to the tumour while sparing other tissues from exposure to the drug. these antibody–drug conjugates or adcs are highly complex and are based on the covalent attachment of a small-molecule cytotoxic drug to an antibody1. the method of attachment needs to be stable during circulation in the blood, but also able to release the drug after binding and internalization in the target cancer cell. after more than 40 years of research and development in this area, there are now eleven adcs approved for human use, with seven of those approved in the past three years. although these successful adcs span a variety of cancer types, including both solid and hematologic tumours, they are all still limited by narrow therapeutic indices (the ratio between efficacious and toxic doses) — preventing even better patient outcomes and often precluding use in earlier lines of treatment.recent research on adcs has focused largely on three areas: (1) improving the chemistry used to form the covalent attachment between the small-molecule ‘linker-drug’ and the antibody protein to enable stable and homogenous conjugates; (2) development of bio-reversible linkers that take advantage of the target cell chemistry (ph, glutathione) or enzymes (proteases, glycosidases); and (3) expanding the diversity of drugs used in adcs to study the impact of varying physicochemical properties, the scaffold, target binding sites and mechanisms of action. one of the primary obstacles to increasing this diversity has been the limited choice of functional groups on drugs that are amenable to selective and stable-yet-reversible linker attachment. until recently, the complex drugs used in adcs (often natural products) needed to contain a primary or secondary amine for attachment through an amide or carbamate, or a thiol for connection via a disulfide. recent discoveries in linker technology have enabled the application of adcs to drugs containing tertiary and heteroaryl amines2 as well as alcohols3. now, a team lead by gonzalo jiménez-osés and gonçalo j. l. bernardes have demonstrated not only a method for making stable prodrugs that convert to ortho-quinones, but also a unique two-component decaging step that requires both protease activation and then acid-assisted elimination. their work expands the types of drugs amenable to antibody-mediated delivery4.tandem-cleavage linkers provide an interesting opportunity for improving tumour selectivity5. elaborated ortho-quinones such as β-lapachone are anti-cancer agents with several mechanisms of action including topoisomerase inhibition and allosteric inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase6. yet these ortho-quinones suffer from off-target toxicity mediated by reactive oxygen species, which is due to redox cycling between quinone and hydroquinone forms. although prodrugs of β-lapachone have previously been described7, they do not have sufficient stability for optimal delivery by antibodies. jiménez-osés, bernardes and co-workers saw an opportunity to devise a new prodrug strategy that would enable a stable and reversible linkage (fig. 1). they envisioned using a para-aminobenzyl self-immolating spacer where the aniline would, through resonance stabilization, bring about the elimination of the hydroxyl group of a hydroquinone, which would then oxidize to the desired ortho-quinone product.β-lapachone is connected to an anti-cd33, leukaemia-targeting antibody through a peptide linker via a stable and reversible connection. upon entry of this conjugate into the lysosome of the cell, the c-terminal amide bond of the val–cit dipeptide is cleaved by proteases. the resulting aniline can then undergo a unique, acid-assisted carbon–carbon bond cleavage to generate a hydroquinone that is rapidly oxidized to the active ortho-quinone free drug.serendipitously, during the attempted synthesis of the o-benzyl product, the team instead obtained a c-benzyl derivative. upon generation of the desired aniline intermediate, they observed a 1,6-elimination and simultaneous oxidation to generate the free ortho-quinone. further study of the elimination reaction uncovered a ph dependence for the elimination; slow and incomplete release was observed under basic conditions, however, acidic conditions enabled successful drug release. importantly, this new linking strategy was confirmed to be both stable in blood and prevent the redox cycling that leads to the off-target toxicity.next, the team designed and assembled a β-lapachone-containing adc for inhibiting the growth of acute myeloid leukaemia cells. they used an antibody found in the clinically approved adc mylotarg, to target cd33, a well validated tumour-associated antigen found on the surface of acute myeloid leukaemia cells. the anti-cd33-β-lapachone adc containing the linker was active in vitro and also inhibited tumour-growth in a murine model of acute myeloid leukaemia at tolerated doses. this is a quite unexpected and interesting result because one significant challenge in the adc field is the requirement to use drugs with extremely high potencies when in the free drug form to ensure that the administered drug-conjugates are active. this restriction arises from the (often limited) amount of drug that can be delivered intracellularly when target saturation occurs.although conjugate potency is dependent on many factors — including drug loading (drug-to-antibody ratio), antigen expression, conjugate internalization and the intracellular retention of the drug (and likely many other factors) — the free drug typically needs to have an ic50 in the picomolar range for an adc to show anti-tumour activity. yet, despite β-lapachone having a free drug potency of ~1 μm, the resulting conjugate was active. it is surprising that such a low potency payload affords an active adc, especially considering the low drug loading (drug-to-antibody ratio of 2) and quite low antigen expression for cd33. an intriguing possibility is that β-lapachone can enact cytotoxic effects upon drug release in the lysosome and not rely on escape from this compartment. there are precedents for adcs, with the site of action being the endosome or lysosome, to potentially have less stringent potency requirements8,9. with this in mind, further studies looking at the impact of the mechanism and site of action on free drug potency requirements for adcs are warranted.there is a tremendous amount of work required before any adcs based on this chemistry can be developed into a useful therapeutic, but it is clear that this method is an interesting approach for linking ortho-quinones to a protein carrier, and that it will enable the exploration of new adcs, and further our understanding of how to make potent and safe adcs.drago, j. z., modi, s. & chandarlapaty, s. nat. rev. clin. oncol. 18, 327–344 (2021).article google scholar staben, l. r. et al. nat. chem. 8, 1112–1119 (2016).cas article google scholar kolakowski, r. v. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 55, 7948–7951 (2016).cas article google scholar dunsmore, l. et al. nat. chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00964-7 (2022).article pubmed google scholar chuprakov, s. et al. bioconjug. chem. 32, 746–754 (2021).cas article google scholar gong, q., hu, j., wang, p., li, x. & zhang, x. eur. j. med. chem. 210, 112962 (2020).article google scholar ma, x. et al. j. control. release 200, 201–211 (2015).cas article google scholar lehar, s. m. et al. nature 527, 323–328 (2015).cas article google scholar gadd, a. j. r., greco, f., cobb, a. j. a. & edwards, a. d. bioconjug. chem. 26, 1743–1752 (2015).cas article google scholar download referencesgenentech, south san francisco, ca, usathomas pillowyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to thomas pillow.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionspillow, t. ortho-quinone drugs go pro. nat. chem. 14, 719–720 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00993-2download citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00993-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 