during cortical development, the generation of neurons from progenitors coincides with increasing vascularization and oxygen levels in the fetal brain and the transition from anaerobic to aerobic metabolism. dong et al. identify lactate, a metabolite of anaerobic glycolysis, as a multifunctional regulator that coordinates synchrony of cortical neurogenesis and angiogenesis.you have full access to this article via your institution.early embryonic development is characterized by relative hypoxia. by mid-gestation, an increase in oxygen from the maternal circulation accompanies fetal vasculature development and erythropoiesis. this metabolically dynamic period is characterized by a shift from anaerobic to aerobic glucose metabolism and coincides with heart, liver, and brain organogenesis. in the developing cerebral cortex, this metabolic shift correlates with the onset of neurogenesis, which is mediated by a change in the mode of neural progenitor cell (npc) division. in mice, from approximately embryonic day (e)11.5 to e13.5, cortical npcs transition from symmetric proliferative npc–npc divisions (which expand the pool of available progenitor cells) to neurogenic divisions (which generate postmitotic neurons). the switch in npc division mode coincides with increasing vascularization and oxygen levels in the fetal brain. this overlap has led to the hypothesis that metabolism, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis are spatiotemporally coordinated, possibly via intercellular signaling molecules.in this issue of nature neuroscience, dong et al.1 uncover the mechanistic underpinnings of the precise coordination among cortical npc metabolism, npc division mode, and vascular development. the authors first used single-cell rna sequencing of e9.5 to e17.5 mouse cortex to assess shifts in metabolic state during cortical development. they found that early, largely symmetrically dividing npcs are characterized by transcriptomic signatures associated with anaerobic glycolysis, whereas late, largely neurogenic npcs are characterized by expression signatures associated with the aerobic tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle.to determine whether these expression differences correspond to distinct modes of glucose metabolism, the authors used assays of glucose-induced extracellular acidification rate and oxygen consumption rate. these analyses confirm a stark transition from predominantly anaerobic glycolysis in e10.5 npcs to predominantly aerobic glucose metabolism in e13.5 npcs (fig. 1), which corroborates a previous study2. consistent with anaerobic glycolysis, e10.5 npcs produced high levels of the metabolite lactate.before the onset of cortical neurogenesis, neural progenitor cells (npcs; green nuclei) in the ventricular zone undergo symmetric divisions to expand the progenitor pool. from e11.5 to e13.5, npcs progressively transition to neurogenic divisions to generate cortical neurons (cyan nuclei). dong et al. find that early, symmetrically dividing npcs (e10.5) largely undergo anaerobic glycolysis, which generates the metabolite lactate. npc-derived lactate functions both in a paracrine manner to signal the ingrowth of cortical vasculature (pink) and in an autocrine manner to maintain symmetric proliferative divisions in npcs. as development progresses (e13.5), increased vascularization coincides with the transition in npcs to aerobic metabolism and neurogenic divisions. thus, lactate derived from early npcs functions both as a signal for blood vessel ingrowth and to maintain the symmetric division mode in npcs, thereby orchestrating synchrony between cortical angiogenesis and neurogenesis.emerging studies show that lactate is not merely a metabolic byproduct; it is also a signaling molecule in diverse organs and systems, including the brain3. to assess potential lactate function in the developing cortex, the authors manipulated lactate production pharmacological or genetically. remarkably, either intraventricular administration of the lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) inhibitor gsk2837808a (gsk) or deletion and knockdown of lactate dehydrogenase genes (ldha and ldhb) led to a striking loss of blood vessel ingrowth into the fetal cortex. the effects of gsk could be rescued by co-administration of lactate, showing that vessel development in the fetal cortex is lactate-dependent. together, these results provide convergent evidence that npc-derived lactate provides a non-cell-autonomous signal for cortical angiogenesis.mechanistically, lactate can induce the production of interleukin 8 (il-8), which promotes endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis4. dong et al.1 found that pharmacological inhibition of ldh by intraventricular administration of gsk reduced endothelial cell expression of cxcl1, the mouse ortholog of il-8. to determine whether cxcl1 signaling contributes to cortical angiogenesis, the authors used reparixin to block the cxcl1 receptor cxcr1. remarkably, blockade of cxcl1 signaling significantly reduced vessel ingrowth into fetal cortex. thus, cxcl1 signaling provides a mechanistic link between lactate production and cortical angiogenesis.having established a role for npc-derived lactate signaling in the development of endothelial cells and vasculature, the authors next sought to determine a potential autocrine role of lactate on npcs. they found that gsk-mediated inhibition of ldh altered the course of neurogenesis, leading to a premature transition in npc division mode from symmetric to neurogenic. this result was confirmed by genetic manipulation of ldh genes and by analysis of dividing cell pairs. together, these data show that lactate derived from early npcs functions both as a signal for blood vessel ingrowth and to maintain the symmetric division mode in npcs, thereby orchestrating synchrony between cortical angiogenesis and neurogenesis.to establish a potential mechanism by which lactate regulates npc division mode, dong et al. assessed mitochondrial morphology, which has been shown to undergo shortening as npcs transition from symmetric to neurogenic divisions5. the authors found that genetic disruption of lactate production in early npcs led to premature shortening of mitochondria concomitant with the premature switch to neurogenic divisions. to empirically establish the effect of mitochondrial length on npc division mode, the authors used the mitochondrial fusion promoter m1 to correct the mitochondrial shortening that follows genetic disruption of ldh genes. remarkably, mitochondria lengthening via m1-induced fusion was sufficient to rescue premature neurogenesis. thus, dong et al.1 elucidate not only the synchrony between glucose metabolism, npc division, and vasculature development, but also the mechanisms that mediate the coordination of these crucial processes. this work also highlights lactate as more than a mere metabolite; it is a multifunctional regulator that is essential for neurogenic–angiogenic synchrony during cortical development (fig. 1).during neural development, both neurogenesis and angiogenesis proceed along developmental gradients. in the telencephalon, angiogenesis begins ventrally, then progresses in a ventral–lateral–dorsal manner6. the transition of cortical npcs from symmetric to neurogenic divisions advances along a similar lateral-first, medial-last gradient over the same developmental period7, consistent with precise spatiotemporal coordination. the coincident changes in metabolism and division mode accompany broad molecular and cellular changes in npcs7; lactate signaling may therefore make additional contributions to these diverse processes. spatially, the effects of lactate signaling may be quite localized. lactate secreted by ventricular npcs both coordinates the ingrowth of blood vessels into the ventricular zone, where they form a dense periventricular plexus, and maintains symmetric divisions within these apically positioned npcs. in the subventricular zone, only a short distance from this source of lactate, intermediate progenitor cells undergo neurogenic divisions. interestingly, intermediate progenitor cells increase in number later in development as the subventricular zone becomes more vascularized and are preferentially positioned in close proximity to blood vessels8, consistent with the correlation between neurogenic divisions and aerobic metabolism. as cortical development progresses, the cortical plate expands and requires vascularization to support neuronal migration and ultimately, the metabolically demanding functions of the postnatal cortex9. whether lactate signaling is required for angiogenesis in the neuronal layers of the developing cortex, or whether other signaling molecules9 can substitute for this role, remains to be explored.the timing of the npc transition from anaerobic to aerobic metabolism coincides with other key developmental processes in cortical development. for example, the tangential migration of microglia into dorsal cortex starts at around e10.5 (ref. 10). microglia, the resident macrophages of the central nervous system, mediate diverse processes in the developing brain, including phagocytic clearance of damaged npcs11. notably, their migration into cortex corresponds to blood vessel development, spreading first along the ventricular and marginal zones, which are adjacent to the periventricular and perineural plexuses, respectively12. then, similar to the ‘waiting period’ of thalamocortical axons in the subplate that precedes their invasion of the cortical plate13, microglia are initially absent from the neuronal layers before migrating into the cortex later in development10, along with increased vascularization. notably, microglia can respond robustly to lactate14. therefore, the lactate signaling between npcs and endothelial cells during corticogenesis may have an additional participant.mitochondrial fusion and fission, reflected in mitochondrial length, are critical mediators of cortical npc renewal and neurogenesis15. fragmented mitochondria produce higher levels of reactive oxygen species, which induce nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (nrf2), a transcription factor that promotes neuronal differentiation programs5. mitochondrial fusion and fission can thereby contribute to npc proliferation and neurogenesis. the results of dong et al.1 place lactate production upstream of elongated mitochondria and find that correcting premature mitochondrial shortening is sufficient to rescue the neurogenic defects that result from disrupted lactate production. this important finding adds to the mechanistic discoveries that together support dual functions of lactate derived from symmetrically dividing npcs; it both signals blood vessel ingrowth into the developing cortex (via cxcl1/il-8 signaling) and maintains symmetric proliferative divisions in npcs (via maintenance of short mitochondrial length). lactate, therefore, is not only a metabolic byproduct of anaerobic metabolism, but also a key regulator of neurogenic–angiogenic synchrony in corticogenesis.dong, x. et al. nat. neurosci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01093-7 (2022).article pubmed google scholar fame, r. m., shannon, m. l., chau, k. f., head, j. p. & lehtinen, m. k. development 146, dev182857 (2019).cas article google scholar barros, l. f. trends neurosci. 36, 396–404 (2013).cas article google scholar li, a. et al. angiogenesis 8, 63–71 (2005).cas article google scholar khacho, m. et al. cell stem cell 19, 232–247 (2016).cas article google scholar vasudevan, a., long, j. e., crandall, j. e., rubenstein, j. l. & bhide, p. g. nat. neurosci. 11, 429–439 (2008).cas article google scholar keil, j. m. et al. nat. commun. 11, 3839 (2020).cas article google scholar stubbs, d. et al. cereb. cortex 19, i32–i41 (2009).article google scholar paredes, i., himmels, p. & ruiz de almodóvar, c. dev. cell 45, 10–32 (2018).cas article google scholar swinnen, n. et al. glia 61, 150–163 (2013).article google scholar shi, l., qalieh, a., lam, m. m., keil, j. m. & kwan, k. y. nat. commun. 10, 2588 (2019).article google scholar penna, e., mangum, j. m., shepherd, h., martínez-cerdeño, v. & noctor, s. c. cereb. cortex 31, 2139–2155 (2021).article google scholar doyle, d. z. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 118, e2100686118 (2021).cas article google scholar monsorno, k., buckinx, a. & paolicelli, r. c. trends endocrinol. metab. 33, 186–195 (2022).cas article google scholar fame, r. m. & lehtinen, m. k. front. cell dev. biol. 9, 780207 (2021).article google scholar download referencesmichigan neuroscience institute (mni), university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usadaniel z. doyle & kenneth y. kwandepartment of human genetics, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usadaniel z. doyle & kenneth y. kwanneuroscience graduate program, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usadaniel z. doyle & kenneth y. kwanyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to kenneth y. kwan.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdoyle, d.z., kwan, k.y. neurogenic–angiogenic synchrony via lactate. nat neurosci 25, 839–840 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01111-8download citationpublished: 04 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01111-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 