anti-pd-1 immunotherapy has emerged as a revolutionary therapeutic strategy against cancer. however, it often leads to undesired side effects. in this issue, a new study reports how pd-1 signalling drives metabolic dysregulation in colonic lymphoid tissue inducer cells, thus contributing to the development of intestinal inflammation.you have full access to this article via your institution.originally discovered in the late 1990s by honjo and colleagues as a negative regulator of t cells, programmed death-1 (pd-1) has been used ever since as a marker of t cell dysfunction in the context of cancer or chronic infections1. nowadays, anti-pd-1 antibodies, commonly known as ‘checkpoint inhibitors’, are used to restore tumour-infiltrating t cell function and have emerged as one of the most successful treatments for cancer. despite this clinical success, the treatment efficacy of anti-pd-1 antibodies remains variable among patients and can result in immune-related adverse events. the underlying reasons for both variable treatment efficacy and adverse effects are not fully understood, but are assumed to be related to the general activation of lymphocytes as a result of pd-1 blockade1.shifting the balance towards the investigation of tissue immunology more recently resulted in the realization that pd-1 is more broadly expressed on immune cells in the tissue, such as tissue resident memory t cells2 and innate lymphoid cells (ilcs)3. ilcs are a relatively new addition to the lymphocyte family and can be divided, based on their function, into three major subsets. group 1 ilcs (ilc1 and nk cells) secrete ifn-γ and are involved in the protection against intracellular pathogens. group 2 ilcs (ilc2) produce the cytokines interleukin (il)-5, il-9, il-13 to protect the host against parasitic infections. in contrast, group 3 ilcs (ilc3), including lymphoid tissue inducer (lti) cells, are characterized by the expression of the cytokines il-22, which mediate important anti-bacterial responses and the maintenance of intestinal barrier integrity4,5,6 (fig. 1).lti cells are innate lymphoid cells that play a crucial role during development and adulthood. by producing il-22, lti cells residing in the gut maintain tissue homeostasis and barrier integrity. a, at steady state, presence and abundance of bacteria constituting the microbiota of the colon correlate with pd-1 expression in lti cells. pd-1 signalling results in an increased rate of glycolysis and lipid metabolism, sustaining both il-22 production and cellular fitness. b, however, genetic deletion of pd-1 or blockade by anti-pd-1 antibody results in lti cell metabolic reprogramming, characterized by enhanced fao, reduced glycolysis and fa biosynthesis. altogether, these metabolic changes result in impaired il-22 production and increased sensitivity to dss-induced colitis. c, inhibition of fao by etomoxir or oxfenicine can rectify aberrant metabolism and restore il-22 production in lti cells. cpt-1, carnitine palmitoyltransferase i; oxphos, oxidative phosphorylation.pd-1 is expressed in ilc precursors and, to various degrees, in mature ilc2s (20–40%), ilc3s (20–30%) and lti cells (up to 76%), while conventional natural killer cells or ilc1s require activation for surface expression3. blockade of pd-1 was reported to enhance the function of both nk cells and ilc2s7,8,9. however, how pd-1 modulates ilcs, especially in the context of cancer therapy, is lacking clarity. in t cells, pd1-dependent inhibition was shown to be mainly mediated by the modulation of t cell receptor signalling. as ilcs are not equipped with specific antigen receptors, signalling through pd-1 must rely on a different molecular mechanism to mediate suppression. recently, attention has shifted to the metabolic requirements of lymphocytes as crucial determinants of differentiation, activation and function. effector t cells rewire their metabolism to aerobic glycolysis and use glutamine catabolism to maintain effector functions and fitness. interestingly, engagement of pd-1 diverts the metabolic reprogramming of lymphocytes towards β-oxidation of fatty acids, which negatively impacts t cell activation and function.to better understand the potential side effects of anti-pd-1 immunotherapy, wu et al. analysed the effect of pd-1 engagement on lti cells in the context of colitis, a common adverse effect occurring upon anti-pd-1 treatment10. by using pd1-deficient (pdcd1−/−) mice and dextran sulfate sodium (dss)-induced colitis, they show that deficiency of pd-1 resulted in increased susceptibility to dss, more iga-coated colitogenic bacteria in the gut and alteration in the microbial composition attributed to a general decrease in barrier function. as mice lacking adaptive immune cells and pd-1 signalling (pdcd1−/−rag2−/−) died within ten days of the colitis, the authors speculated that pd-1 might play a crucial role in regulating innate immune responses.colonic lti cells have been reported to play a crucial role in limiting colitis-induced inflammation and in maintaining gut integrity via the expression of il-22; they are also marked by high-surface expression of pd-1. analysing pd-1 expression on lti cells, wu et al. found higher expression of pd-1 on colonic and caecal lti cells correlating with high bacterial burden in this area of the gut, in comparison to lti cells isolated from the small intestine. in confirmation of a potential connection between high bacterial burden and pd-1 expression, administration of the antibiotic metronidazole resulted in the downregulation of pd-1 on lti cells. additional functional analysis of pd1 on lti cells revealed that high expression of pd-1 correlated with the propensity to produce elevated amounts of il-22. however, in pdcd1−/− mice, il-22 production was strongly impaired, suggesting that expression of pd-1 is important for maintaining the effector functions of lti cells. by using a humanized pd-1 strain (pdcd1h/h) carrying the extracellular and transmembrane domain of human pdcd1, therefore unable to engage with murine pd-l1, the authors revealed the importance of pd-1 signalling for il-22 production. only lti cells with intact pd-1 signalling responded with the upregulation of genes involved in lti cell activation, cytokine-signalling pathways and adhesion modules. consistently with previous metabolic analysis on activated ilc3s11,12, the authors showed that upregulation of carbohydrate metabolism and lipid biosynthesis supports il-22 production. in contrast, the absence of pd-1 resulted in a metabolic reprogramming, characterized by a reduction in glycolysis and a skewing towards fatty acid oxidation (fao) with a concomitant increase in autophagy, protein catabolism and ubiquitination. furthermore, addition of palmitate to lti cells or analysis of lti cells from high-fat-diet fed animals resulted in a marked reduction of lti cell-derived il-22, suggesting that excessive fao could impair the functionality of this subset. addressing this hypothesis, wu et al. found that treatment with fao inhibitors, such as etomoxir and oxfenicine, restored il-22 production in pd-1−/− lti cells. thus, with their analysis and the combination of in vitro and in vivo data the authors highlight the key role of pd-1 as a metabolic checkpoint in innate lymphocytes, restraining fao to facilitate activation and function of lti cells.several questions remain open: although the authors identify aberrant lipid metabolism as a major confounder of dysfunctional lti cells, it remains unclear how increased fao is actually impairing the production of il-22. reactive oxygen species produced in the context of fao in mitochondria could provide a potential explanation, as they can have a negative impact on cell function. therefore, further detailed analysis of intracellular lipid metabolism may be essential. furthermore, the function of pd-1 in lti cells appears to be divergent in comparison to the function of pd-1 in other immune cells. pd-1 deletion or blockade in t cells and ilc2s potentiates their effector function and results in activation and rewiring towards glycolysis and glutaminolysis, enhancing inflammation and causing pathology. in light of these findings, it is intriguing that depletion of pd-1 in lti cells results in impaired functionality. it will be important to unravel pd-1 function in other ilc3 subsets and to identify whether the current findings also apply to other ilc3-mediated diseases.nonetheless, the emerging understanding of pd-1 as an essential molecule in regulating metabolic functions in tissue resident immune cells is exciting and warrants further investigation. the fact that excess fatty acids promote fao in lti cells and reduce il-22 production could turn out to be particularly problematic in the context of obesity. hence, individuals affected by obesity may be prone to pd-1 blockade induced intestinal complications. in this study, blockade of fao by etomoxir rescued the function of pd1−/− lti cells, which suggests that correcting cellular metabolism could be used to reverse adverse side effects of pd-1 blockade. yet, the key experiment will be to show that blocking fao in pdcd1−/− mice subjected to colitis will also provide a therapeutic effect. addressing these questions will be fundamental to further support the emerging view of pd-1 as an important regulator of ilc metabolism and to determine where translation of these findings by wu et al. to the clinic would be most appropriate.patsoukis, n., wang, q., strauss, l. & boussiotis, v. a. sci. adv. 6, eabd2712 (2020).cas article google scholar kumar, b. v. et al. cell rep. 20, 2921–2934 (2017).cas article google scholar yu, y. et al. nature 539, 102–106 (2016).cas article google scholar spits, h. et al. nat. rev. immunol. 13, 145–149 (2013).cas article google scholar spits, h. & di santo, j. p. nat. immunol. 12, 21–27 (2011).cas article google scholar artis, d. & spits, h. nature 517, 293–301 (2015).cas article google scholar helou, d. g. et al. nat. commun. 11, 3998 (2020).cas article google scholar taylor, s. et al. j. exp. med. 214, 1663–1678 (2017).cas article google scholar hsu, j. et al. j. clin. invest. 128, 4654–4668 (2018).article google scholar wu, d. et al. n. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00595-9 (2022).article google scholar di luccia, b., gilfillan, s., cella, m., colonna, m. & huang, s. c. j. exp. med. 216, 2231–2241 (2019).cas article google scholar serafini, n. et al. science 375, 859–863 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesinstitute of clinical chemistry and clinical pharmacology, medical faculty, university hospital bonn, university of bonn, bonn, germanylaura suraceimmunopathology unit, institute of clinical chemistry and clinical pharmacology, medical faculty, university hospital bonn, university of bonn, bonn, germanychristoph wilhelmyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to laura surace or christoph wilhelm.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssurace, l., wilhelm, c. keeping ilcs in shape: pd-1 as a metabolic checkpoint. nat metab 4, 794–795 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00599-5download citationpublished: 04 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00599-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 