cryo-electron microscopy uncovers the interfacial failure mechanism of lithium metal anodes at the atomic scale, informing a f-rich solid-electrolyte interface design strategy for highly-reversible solid-state li metal batteries.you have full access to this article via your institution.commercial li-ion batteries are presently composed of graphite anodes and nonaqueous liquid electrolytes. their power output is insufficient and flammable concerns too high to meet the booming demand of energy storage devices accompanying the green energy transition. consequently, there is a strong motivation to develop new energy storage systems beyond the liquid-based li-ion chemistry1. to move forward, the solid-state li metal battery, combining metallic lithium anodes and solid polymer electrolytes, stands out as one of the most promising candidates for practical high-energy and high-safety batteries2. a key enabler is engineering a stable electrode–electrolyte interface. however, lithium metal is highly reactive, and has been challenging to understand its interfacial chemistry. interfacial side reactions bring about poor li plating and stripping reversibility3,4, severely limiting cycling efficiency. writing in nature nanotechnology, lin et al. now reveal the origin of interfacial instability with an atomic scale resolution by cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryoem) and report an effective solution to construct a fluorinated interphase for much-enhanced electrochemical performances in solid-state li metal batteries5.the invention of cryoem and its value for the high-resolution determination of biomolecules was recognized with the nobel prize in chemistry in 2017, but in recent years the technique has taken hold also as a powerful tool to characterize materials and interfaces by the batteries community6. the resolution reaches a level of atomic detail, and cryo-transfer processes preserve the native state of the material, making the technique non-invasive. lin et al. probe the li deposition in a typical solid-state li metal battery.the solid-state polymer electrolyte in a standard battery contains ethylene acrylate monomer and succinonitrile, a known plasticizer. after li metal deposition, the cryoem tomography indicates that there are multiple voids and filaments throughout the li metal anode. the dendritic morphology of li metal anodes is attributed to continuous interfacial corrosions. no passivation layer forms on the li metal surface to protect it from further corrosion. during battery cycling in solid polymer electrolytes, the as-grown li metal reacts with polyacrylic and succinonitrile plasticizer. a three-dimensional tomography together with chemical analyses shows that the oxydation spreads over the whole li filaments. the consequent volume change further leads to internal stresses, leading to the formation of crack and interfacial instability. hence, li metal anodes show poor cycling reversibility.leveraging this failure knowledge to inspire interfacial design, lin et al. introduce fluoroethylene carbonate (fec) into the solid polymer electrolytes to form a conformal passivated interface as a li metal protective layer (fig. 1). fec is a star additive in li batteries, as it forms a beneficial lithium fluorides-rich interface7. after introducing fec, cryoem images reveal that a nanometre-thick interfacial layer covers li metal deposits conformally with a well-defined dome shape. abundant nanodomains are densely-packed forming a mosaic interfacial structure. some inorganic components such as li2o are crystallized and exhibits random crystallographic orientations. the lithium fluorides exist in a disordered or amorphous phase. the fec-induced fluorides are distributed throughout the surface layer on li metal anodes leading to a dendrite-free lithium metal interface. as a result, the researchers achieve improved electrochemical stability and cycling performances (coulombic efficiency of 99.0% under li-lean conditions).a,b, common polymer electrolyte interface (a) and fluoroethylene carbonate-derived polymer electrolyte (b). as revealed by cryogenic transmission electron microscopy, there are multiple voids and li metal filaments leading to interfacial instability with common solid polymer electrolytes. while the fluoroethylene carbonate additive contributes to a thin and conformal interfacial layer to protect li metal anodes.the fec-enriched solid polymer electrolyte also possesses high ionic conductivity (1.01 ms/cm at 30 °c) and good transference number (0.57), which is beneficial for a high-rate and dendrite-free cycling. additionally, the critical current density of 3.2 ma/cm2 measure by lin et al. is sufficient for most fast-charging conditions. solid-state li metal full cells with high-voltage cathodes licoo2 exhibit prolonged cycle lifetime of 400 cycles. it is worth emphasizing also that most full cells tested by the researchers are cycled at a low negative/positive capacity ratio, where excess lithium is not required, hence the energy density and safety are high.further work should focus on tracking the interfacial evolution involving a li-stripping state after repeated cycling in a full-cell configuration, and cycling under high areal capacities and extreme environments that mimic practical operation more closely.viswanathan, v. et al. nature 601, 519–525 (2022).cas article google scholar lin, d., liu, y. & cui, y. nat. nanotech. 12, 194–206 (2017).cas article google scholar cao, y. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 14, 200–207 (2019).cas article google scholar zheng, j. et al. chem. soc. rev. 49, 2701–2750 (2020).cas article google scholar lin, r. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01148-7 (2022).article google scholar li, y. et al. science 358, 506–510 (2017).cas article google scholar zhang, x. q. et al. adv. funct. mater. 27, 1605989 (2017).article google scholar download referencesadvanced research institute of multidisciplinary science, beijing institute of technology, beijing, chinajia-qi huangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jia-qi huang.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionshuang, jq. understanding interphases at the atomic scale. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 680–681 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01150-zdownload citationpublished: 30 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01150-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 