organisms living at elevation are exposed to a constant state of hypoxia compared to those at low altitude. a recent study1 has shown that flowering plants acclimatize to high altitude through natural variation in molecular oxygen (o2) sensing, with high-altitude populations exhibiting increased o2 sensitivity to balance physiological and metabolic outputs. this finding demonstrates convergent mechanisms for altitude adaptation across eukaryotic kingdoms despite differences in the hypoxia-signalling pathways of plants and animals.you have full access to this article via your institution.oxygen (o2) is critical for cellular respiration as well as a wide range of biochemical reactions, and molecular mechanisms for sensing and responding to o2 availability have evolved across taxa so that metabolism, growth and development can be appropriately aligned to the availability of this essential gas2. whereas metazoan animals have a dedicated circulatory system that enables efficient oxygenation of tissues throughout the body plan, o2 delivery in plants is passive. as such, low o2 (hypoxia) is a frequent feature of the plant life cycle, arising as a result of diffusion limitations (for example, in dense tissues such as thick stems or tubers), in tissues with high metabolic activity (such as the shoot apical meristem and lateral root primordia), in response to pathogen attack, or when exogenous o2 supply is compromised3,4. the last of these is most associated with flooding stress, where gas diffusion is drastically reduced and water turbidity limits photosynthesis. however, environmental o2 availability also varies with altitude. in contrast to flooding, which is unpredictable and often transient, differences in atmospheric o2 concentration at elevation represent a constant state of relative hypoxia. thus, it can be assumed that plant species or populations growing at altitude will need to acclimatize to reduced o2 availability compared to equivalent species or populations at lower altitudes, without comprising overall fitness. a recent study in nature1 has now shown that plant adaptation to altitude is linked to natural variation in o2 sensitivity, via molecular o2 sensing (fig. 1).oxygen concentration decreases with altitude. the arabidopsis sha ecotype grows at 3,400 m a.s.l. (13.7% o2), and so naturally experiences constant relative hypoxia compared to col-0 (<100 m a.s.l.). to accommodate this, sha is more sensitive to o2; the increased sensitivity is mediated by o2-responsive erfvii transcription factors, which control tetrapyrrole biosynthesis and anaerobic gene expression. this increased sensitivity in high-altitude accessions (potentially due to an unknown dominant repressor that is more active in low-altitude accessions) provides acclimatizion to local o2 availability to ensure equivalent physiological and developmental outputs. this altitude-associated variation in o2 sensitivity was observed for a diverse range of plant species, identifying genetic variation in o2 sensing as a broad mechanism for controlling adaptation to altitude in angiosperms. mountain image: john harper/stone/getty.in flowering plants, low o2 is detected by the proteolysis6 (prt6) branch of the n-degron pathway, which degrades erfvii transcription factors following o2-dependent oxidation of their conserved nt-cys residue by plant cysteine oxidase (pco) enzymes5,6,7. early seedling development (that is, skotomorphogenesis) is attuned to o2 availability in the soil, with hypoxia limiting accumulation of the chlorophyll precursor protochlorophyllide (pchlide) to coordinate survival during the photomorphogenic transition8. to investigate potential links between plant o2 responses and altitude adaptation, abbas et al1. first characterized the mechanistic connection between hypoxia and pchlide accumulation via the o2-dependent tetrapyrrole synthesis pathway. they showed that decreases in o2 led to lower levels of pchlide in etiolated seedlings of diverse angiosperm species. in arabidopsis, this effect was largely abolished in an erfvii pentuple mutant (that lacks erfvii activity), whereas ectopic stabilization of erfviis (through a cys2ala mutation or in the prt6 mutant) led to constitutively reduced pchlide levels. several genes linked to tetrapyrrole biosynthesis were shown to be direct transcriptional targets of active erfviis: flu (which encodes a negative regulator of pchlide) was upregulated, whereas genes for other key biosynthesis components (chl27, pora and porb) were downregulated. thus, pchlide accumulation is linked to canonical o2 sensing via erfviis and is not a consequence of o2-related effects on enzymes altering pathway flux.next, the authors investigated how o2-regulated tetrapyrrole biosynthesis might be influenced by altitude, by investigating pchlide accumulation at 48 m above sea level (a.s.l.) (~21% o2) in diverse accessions of different angiosperm species that naturally occur over a range of altitudes (from sea level to>3,000 m). this revealed a positive correlation between altitude and pchlide abundance, with high-altitude accessions exhibiting reduced flu expression, increased chl27, pora and porb expression, and higher generation of reactive oxygen species following transfer to light. for one high-altitude arabidopsis accession — sha (3,400 m a.s.l.) — these effects could be reverted by introgressing the prt6 mutant allele from col-0 (<100 m a.s.l.), affirming a key role for o2 sensing in mediating accession-specific responses. when plants from the same populations were examined in a laboratory at high altitude (2,479 m a.s.l., ~15.4% o2), pchlide accumulation was reduced in all accessions, resembling patterns observed when grown under 15% oxygen at 48 m a.s.l. this precludes atmospheric pressure changes as the causal factor for the observed variation in pchlide, and instead shows that mountainous accessions from diverse species have increased sensitivity to o2.in accordance with ecotype-specific differences in o2 sensitivity, erfviis were shown to be more active in low-altitude versus high-altitude accessions, and expression levels of classic anaerobic metabolism genes correlated with this. the erfvii hre2 was less stable and had reduced occupancy at tetrapyrrole and anaerobic gene promoters in sha than in col-0 when studied at low altitude, and these effects could be overcome with hypoxia treatment, by the prt6 mutant or through the introduction of mutant stable erfviis into both ecotypes, providing strong proof that erfviis (rather than downstream components) cause the accession-specific variation in o2 sensitivity. furthermore, by crossing sha to erfvii, the authors showed that erfviis have the potential to function as effectively in sha as they do in col-0, suggesting that differences in o2 sensitivity are modulated by an as-yet-unknown dominant repressor of o2 sensing that is more active in low-altitude accessions.in arabidopsis, several other o2-regulated targets of the prt6 n-degron pathway have been described, including the shoot apical meristem-specific transcription factor zpr2 and the polycomb protein vrn29,10. given the ecotype-specific differences in erfvii stability and activity, it will now be important to investigate whether altitudinal variation in o2 sensitivity also influences the abundance and function of these alternative protein substrates to coordinate development and environmental responses. it will also be important to establish if ecotype-specific variation in o2 sensing influences other o2-dependent biochemical pathways to facilitate altitude adaptation. another key question is whether variation in o2 sensitivity affects resilience to acute hypoxic stress during floods. for example, sha was previously identified as one of the less flood-tolerant accessions of arabidopsis11. although abbas et al. reported no clear correlation between altitude and submergence resilience, the increased o2 sensitivity of higher-altitude ecotypes suggests that they might induce stress responses only under more severe hypoxic conditions compared to those at low altitude, where incidents of flooding are also more frequent. as such, a more detailed investigation into the relationship between altitude and different submergence responses is warranted.in humans, adaptation to high altitude is linked to mutations in the hif-based o2 sensing pathway that increase o2 sensitivity12. this new study now reveals that plants also adapt to high altitude through genetic alterations in their capacity to sense o2 via erfviis, thereby aligning their metabolism with environmental o2 availability. this highlights a convergence of mechanism across eukaryotic kingdoms despite divergence of the o2-sensing pathways involved2. in plants, it is likely that this adaptation prevents constitutive induction of hypoxia-stress responses and balances cellular function and development despite variation in o2 availability. it will now be important to identify the causal factor(s) for this variation in o2 sensitivity across plant populations, which may represent a promising target for manipulating hypoxic-stress resilience and expanding altitudinal growth ranges for diverse ecologically and agronomically relevant species.abbas, m. et al. nature 606, 565–569 (2022).cas article google scholar holdsworth, m. j. & gibbs, d. j. curr. biol. 30, r362–r369 (2020).cas article google scholar weits, d. a., van dongen, j. t. & licausi, f. new phytol. 229, 24–35 (2021).cas article google scholar bailey-serres, j. et al. trends plant sci. 17, 129–138 (2012).cas article google scholar gibbs, d. j. et al. nature 479, 415–418 (2011).cas article google scholar licausi, f. et al. nature 479, 419–422 (2011).cas article google scholar weits, d. a. et al. nat. commun. 5, 3425 (2014).article google scholar abbas, m. et al. curr. biol. 25, 1483–1488 (2015).cas article google scholar weits, d. a. et al. nature 569, 714–717 (2019).cas article google scholar gibbs, d. j. et al. nat. commun. 9, 5438 (2018).cas article google scholar vashisht, d. et al. new phytol. 190, 299–310 (2011).cas article google scholar storz, j. f. science 329, 40–41 (2010).cas article google scholar download referencesd.j.g. and r.o. were supported by the european research council (erc starting grant 715441-gasplant) and the biotechnology and biological sciences research council (grant bb/v008587/1).school of biosciences, university of birmingham, edgbaston, ukdaniel j. gibbs & rory osborneyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to daniel j. gibbs.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsgibbs, d.j., osborne, r. high on oxygen. nat. plants 8, 731–732 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01196-wdownload citationpublished: 30 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01196-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 