giant exciton–polaritons come to the scene from a thin cu2o crystal sandwiched by a microcavity. their anticipated strong interactions may facilitate the development of a promising rydberg solid-state platform for quantum technologies.you have full access to this article via your institution.on most roads, cars run along the lanes abiding by the traffic signals. at crossroads, two vehicles driving towards each other must turn away to prevent a head-on collision unless one stops while the other passes. similar situations take place in the microscopic atomic world as a consequence of the interplay between participating quantum entities and their interactions with each other and the environment. instances where matter meets with light are particularly fascinating. to enhance the tendency of a quasiparticle and a photon to encounter each other, researchers can devise photonic structures where quantum quasiparticles reside at the same time as a photon is confined by a resonator. a tightly localized space enforces a quantum quasiparticle and a photon to be strongly coupled, and, as a consequence, they transform into a new light-dressed quantum quasiparticle. a fingerprint manifestation of such strong coupling results in an avoiding phenomenon in their energy–momentum relations, as illustrated in fig. 1a, where the two energy branches of excitons — that is, coulombically bound electron–hole pairs — and photons do not go across, but rather divert to one another in the middle, the ‘anti-crossing’ region, to host the new emergent quasiparticle, known as polaritons. there are a variety of polaritons from different types of particle dressed by light1.a, a schematic of an anti-crossing energy–momentum dispersion relation. yellow p excitons lie on the horizontal line and photons lie on the vertical light-cone trajectory, which are converted to light-dressed rydberg excitons (rydberg exciton–polaritons) emergent at an anti-crossing region in the middle. b, an illustration of the rydberg exciton–polaritons in between highly reflective dielectric bragg reflector (dbr) mirrors from four yellow p excitons (n = 3, 4, 5 and 6) in light-dresses.a microcavity exciton–polariton is a well-known solid-state photonic system that emerges when an exciton in matter, typically in a semiconductor quantum well (qw), conjoins with a photon in a microcavity resonator made by a pair of mirrors. the exciton in the qw consists of two oppositely charged components — an electron and a hole. note the similarity to the hydrogen atom, the simplest atom, where one single electron can circulate around a nucleus at different sized orbits denoted by an integer index n, a principal quantum number, which counts up the hierarchy of electronic orbits. the life and death of an exciton in a qw can be often determined by its interactions with light through the absorption and emission of photons. excitons are created from absorbing the energy of photons when light shines on the qw, but they may disappear by emitting light of a specific colour. this life–death cycle between excitons and photons can be aided by incorporating the matter in a microcavity designed to intensify exciton–photon coexistence. in semiconductors, tiny cavities with sizes comparable to the photon wavelength can be implemented. now, writing in nature materials, konstantinos orfanakis and colleagues report a demonstration of rydberg exciton–polaritons in a thin, red cuprous oxide (cu2o) crystal sandwiched by a microcavity formed by a pair of dielectric planar mirrors2.the term, rydberg exciton, refers to a larger exciton where an electron sits in a higher-energy state and, thus, its circulating orbit is farther from the centre of a hole with a greater quantum number n. this is analogous to a rydberg hydrogen atom whose electron rotates around a nucleus at an outer trajectory while still bounded to a nucleus via an attractive interaction. one notable characteristic of rydberg atoms is the wonderful scaling properties of their radial size, interaction strength, response to electric and magnetic fields, and lifetime versus n. by exploiting these properties in optical domains, rydberg atoms have become a promising material architecture to build ultimate sensors and quantum technologies3. in 2014, giant rydberg excitons with p orbitals up to n = 25 were reported from a cu2o natural crystal in the region of yellow-colour wavelengths4. since then, the interest in cu2o semiconductors has been renewed to pursue active theoretical and experimental endeavours to examine the scaling laws of rydberg physics5 and to engineer rydberg technologies in solid-state materials.orfanakis and colleagues go one step further by embedding a thin cu2o crystal in a fabry–pérot microcavity — that is, a pair of distributed bragg reflector mirrors made by alternating two dielectric materials (as shown in fig. 1b)2. in this design, the crystal thickness of tens of micrometres sets the cavity size, allowing numerous photon modes with equally spaced energy levels, some of which can be on resonance with the exciton energies. in this way, the authors report that yellow rydberg excitons from n = 3 to n = 6 are light-dressed, turning into rydberg exciton–polaritons, as illustrated in fig. 1b. at four different energy values in the energy–momentum maps, the emergent exciton–polaritons leave unambiguous traces of anti-crossing paths that resemble the avoiding paths of two cars at an intersection.the existence of high-n rydberg exciton–polaritons in a microcavity-cu2o crystal structure prompts us to consider the impact of stronger interactions among rydberg excitons as n increases and to wonder whether these will become a solid-state venue to search for exotic quantum phases arising from many-body correlations. another remarkable catch from the sample investigated in this work is that the rydberg exciton states are robust against possible mechanical strain during fabrication processes such as the placement of the crystal on top of the bottom mirror followed by a direct mirror growth directly above the sample, as it is known that strain or stress may degrade the optical quality of the cu2o crystals6. this work by orfanakis and colleagues opens an exciting research path and will stimulate subsequent research activities using cu2o semiconductors as an interesting material platform to explore the fascinating physics of polaritons based on yellow p excitons at giant orbits, the interactions of which are anticipated to be strong and a promising knob for solid-state photonic devices and sensors.basov, d. n. et al. nanophotonics 10, 549–577 (2021).article google scholar orfanakis, k. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01230-4 (2022).article google scholar saffman, m., walker, t. g. & mølmer, k. rev. mod. phys. 82, 2313–2363 (2010).cas article google scholar kazimierczuk, t. et al. nature 514, 343–347 (2014).cas article google scholar aβmann, m. & bayer, m. adv. quantum technol. 3, 1900134 (2020).article google scholar lynch, s. a. et al. phys. rev. mater. 5, 084602 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesinstitute for quantum computing, university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canadaheebong yang & na young kimwaterloo institute for nanotechnology, university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canadaheebong yang & na young kimdepartment of electrical and computer engineering, university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canadaheebong yang & na young kimdepartment of physics and astronomy, university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canadana young kimdepartment of chemistry, university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canadana young kimperimeter institute for theoretical physics, waterloo, ontario, canadana young kimyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to na young kim.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsyang, h., kim, n.y. large excitons in light-dress. nat. mater. 21, 736–737 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01271-9download citationpublished: 29 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01271-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 