dynamic recrystallization helps to refine grain structures in metals and tune their properties. confining recrystallization within prior nanoscale twinning provides a path for reaching exceptional grain refinement.you have full access to this article via your institution.the quest for refining grain structures in metals dates back to the origins of metallurgy, when forging operations served not only to produce objects with specific shapes but also as a strengthening mechanism. while most of the metals and alloys inherited from casting exhibit coarse grain structures, their mechanical properties substantially improve when reducing the average crystal (or grain) size. submicrometre grain structures are of particular interest, as they can lead to exceptional properties and/or new physical behaviours such as high strength combined with high ductility, low-temperature superplasticity, creep or corrosion resistance, hydrogen storage, superconductivity, biocompatibility and so on1,2,3. a number of grain-refining methods have therefore been devised, typically taking advantage of thermal and mechanical treatments. recrystallization phenomena induced by such treatments may lead to average crystal sizes as low as hundreds of nanometres. now, writing in nature materials, ahmed tiamiyu and colleagues4 report a recrystallization mechanism leading to crystal sizes of tens of nanometres. they show that controlled extreme conditions of strain and strain rate induce nanoscale twinning, followed by recrystallization within the twins. the scenario contrasts with the traditional partitioning of grains by (nano)twins.the standard approach for refining grain structures through recrystallization consists of deforming the material at medium to high temperatures, up to large strains. in such conditions, dynamic recrystallization (drx) proceeds by reorganizing defects and grain structure to minimize the internal energy. depending on the chosen thermomechanical conditions (temperature, strain and strain rate), the type of microstructure and intrinsic material properties such as the stacking fault energy (sfe), these reorganizations proceed according to three main mechanisms (fig. 1a): discontinuous (ddrx), continuous (cdrx) or geometric (gdrx) drx5. ddrx is frequently observed for low-sfe materials and involves the nucleation of new dislocation-free grains growing at the expense of the surrounding, highly dislocated region. in materials with higher sfe, efficient dynamic recovery allows dislocations to rearrange during deformation into cell or subgrain structures, forming low-angle boundaries. these evolve progressively into high-angle boundaries as deformation increases, and eventually form a new grain structure. in gdrx, strain-induced grain thinning can reach a stage at which the grain thickness falls below 1–2 subgrain size; serrations of boundaries then develop until they meet and form equiaxed, refined grains.a, the three standard types of drx, that is, ddrx, cdrx and gdrx5. b, map showing the expected deformation mechanism for copper as a function of true strain and the zener–hollomon parameter z, assuming an initial 20 µm grain size4. boundary (i) separates the high-z region where twinning is dominant from the low-z region where dislocation slip is dominant. dislocation dominated regimes are further divided with boundaries (ii), (iii) and (iv), indicating transitions to mechanisms of subgrain recovery and shear bands, ddrx and cdrx. in the high-z region, twinning competes with dislocation slip; it becomes dominant when crossing boundary (v), and leads to nanotwinning-assisted drx (ntdrx) when crossing boundary (vi). results with the lipit are compared with those from previous studies (please refer to ref. 4 for the data sources); error bars indicate strain ranges found within individual copper particles. c, schematic scenario of ntdrx4. panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 5, elsevier. panels b and c adapted with permission from ref. 4, springer nature ltd.exploiting the different types of drx to form ultrafine, nanocrystalline structures, however, remains a difficult challenge. the lower limit in grain size relates to the critical nucleus (for ddrx) or asymptotic cell structure (for cdrx and gdrx) able to resist capillary forces. severe plastic-deformation processes are often used for producing nanostructures1,3, for example, by equal channel angular pressing, or high-pressure torsion. these processes, however, operate in a limited range of temperature and strain rate. machining, ball milling or surface mechanical attrition can reach higher strain rates6 (up to 104 s–1), but usually with limited control on the strain and/or strain rate. other methods have instead explored cryogenic temperatures, for example, using surface mechanical grinding7 or dynamic plastic deformation8. in their work, tiamiyu and colleagues4 propose to take advantage of a recently developed laser-induced particle impact tester (lipit)9 for studying both very large strains and very large strain rates (fig. 1b), with a control on the impact velocity. the impact of copper microparticles with supersonic speeds onto the copper substrate leads to local strains of up to 1.5, exceptionally high strain rates above 108 s–1, and self-heating of a few hundred degrees celsius. very high strain rates and/or low temperatures can favour the formation of nanotwins in copper7,8, with a mean thickness of generally well below 100 nm. these nanotwins normally keep forming with increasing strain at local stress concentration points induced by dislocation accumulation, and their interaction with the evolving grain structure contributes to its refinement. in the lipit experiments, however, tiamiyu and colleagues found that nanotwins behave as nuclei for subsequent recrystallization, that is to say a cdrx-type mechanism can operate within the nanotwin, partitioning and polygonizing the twin lamella (fig. 1c). this scenario helps to break the lower limit in grain size produced by standard drx mechanisms. only one grain will typically appear in the thickness of the twin, bounded by the twin boundaries, which are quasi-immobile during most of the subsequent drx process, whereas the cdrx mechanism proceeds in laterally partitioning the nanotwin. as the twin boundaries start bulging out only at the very last drx stages, when they transform into general, more mobile, high-angle boundaries, the resulting grain structure is only slightly coarser (~35 nm) than the initial nanotwins (~20 nm). comparatively, standard drx nuclei of the same size are not likely to be stable due to the higher grain-boundary energy and mobility, unless grain boundaries interact with second-phase particles10. furthermore, limited thermally activated grain-boundary migration occurs after lipit deformation, considering the size of the copper particles and the very short contact time (~15 ns).one can anticipate that other types of alloy, such as those exhibiting the twinning-induced plasticity effect, could develop similar ‘nanotwinning-assisted’ drx mechanisms, if subjected to sufficiently high strains. as the twinning-induced plasticity effect can result in nanotwinning at regular strain rates (and low strains), it considerably simplifies the experimental set-up compared with lipit. detailed nanotwin-to-nanograin evolutions remain largely unexplored in many of these materials; for example, it is often not clear whether drx operates within the nanotwins and how much the nanotwin boundaries deviate, with increasing strain, from perfect coincidence.valiev, r. z., islamgaliev, r. k. & alexandrov, i. v. prog. mater. sci. 45, 103–189 (2000).cas article google scholar liu, x. c., zhang, h. w. & lu, k. science 342, 337–340 (2013).cas article google scholar edalati, k. et al. mater. res. lett. 10, 163–256 (2022).cas article google scholar tiamiyu, a. a. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01250-0 (2022).article google scholar huang, k. & logé, r. e. mater. design 111, 548–574 (2016).cas article google scholar chan, h. l., ruan, h. h., chen, a. y. & lu, j. acta mater. 58, 5086–5096 (2010).cas article google scholar li, w. l., tao, n. r. & lu, k. scripta mater. 59, 546–549 (2008).cas article google scholar li, y. s., tao, n. r. & lu, k. acta mater. 56, 230–241 (2008).cas article google scholar hassani-gangaraj, m., veysset, d., nelson, k. a. & schuh, c. a. scripta mater. 145, 9–13 (2018).cas article google scholar huang, k., marthinsen, k., zhao, q. & logé, r. e. prog. mater. sci. 92, 284–359 (2018).cas article google scholar download referenceslaboratory of thermomechanical metallurgy (lmtm), px group chair, ecole polytechnique fédérale de lausanne (epfl), neuchatel, switzerlandroland e. logéyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to roland e. logé.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionslogé, r.e. nanotwinning-assisted recrystallization. nat. mater. 21, 738–739 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01284-4download citationpublished: 29 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01284-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 