ultrathin crsbr, a two-dimensional magnet, has been shown to exhibit very rich magnetic behaviours, from an unexpected magnetic order to optical emissions coupled to its magnetic state. this material has great potential for use in ultra-compact spintronics devices.you have full access to this article via your institution.since the clear demonstration of the long-awaited two-dimensional (2d) magnetism in materials such as cri3 and cr2ge2te6, van der waals magnets have attracted much attention for both fundamental research and applications in spin-based electronic devices1. although dozens of such layered magnetic materials have been discovered so far, their electrical properties often exhibit either insulating or metallic properties. magnetic semiconductors with strongly coupled electrical properties are in demand for their ability to control spin and charge carriers simultaneously, but these are rare. the recently isolated atomically thin crsbr (ref. 2) is an exciting candidate material that holds promise to meet these important material requirements. now, writing in nature materials, two separate works from evan telford and colleagues3, and nathan wilson and colleagues4, investigate this highly anisotropic material, revealing a hidden magnetic order embedded in its long-range magnetically ordered state and excitonic emissions coupled to its magnetic order, respectively.crsbr is a semiconductor with a thickness-dependent bandgap, varying from ~1.5 ev in bulk to ~1.8 ev in monolayer. as shown in fig. 1, bulk crsbr is formed by stacking monolayers, consisting of two buckled planes of crs sandwiched by br atoms, along the c axis. this crystal structure results in anisotropic properties. below the neel temperature (tn), crsbr is an a-type antiferromagnet (afm) composed of ferromagnetic (fm) monolayers with spins pointing along the easy axis (b) of the plane, which are coupled antiferromagnetically along the c axis. with the application of an external magnetic field above a critical field (bsat), the material becomes a ferromagnet. in fact, comparing its key magnetic properties with crx3 trihalides (x = i, br, cl), the most extensively studied layered magnet, brings crsbr to the spotlight. for example, crsbr exhibits enhanced air stability, gate-tunable conductivity and a high tn of ~140 k, which is nearly insensitive to the layer number.a, the top image shows the crystal structure of a monolayer crsbr viewed from the a–b axes and the bottom image shows its bilayer stacked along the c axis. b, magnetic phase diagram of monolayer (bottom panel) and a few-layers-thick (top panel) crsbr obtained through magnetotransport measurements. with decreasing temperature, the paramagnetic (pm) monolayer first exhibits interplanar fm (labelled as fm and i-fm for monolayer and thicker crystals, respectively) ordering with spins pointing along the crystal’s easy axis of b near the curie temperature (tc ≈ 170k), followed by further changes in spin texture due to magnetic defects (td) below 40 k. while bilayer or thicker crsbr shows similar defect-mediated fm transition (d-fm, less pronounced), it is an afm at zero field with a tn of ~140 k. above the saturation field (bsat), it becomes a fm due to metamagnetic effect. panel a reproduced with permission from ref. 4, springer nature ltd.unlike the insulating crx3 trihalides, whose magnetic properties can often be investigated in vertically fabricated tunnelling devices, crsbr is a more conductive material. this property enabled telford and colleagues to fabricate lateral transport devices on conventional si/sio2 substrate3. with these devices, the authors revealed the rich magnetic behaviour of mono- and bilayer crsbr by examining its transport response as a function of temperature, direction-dependent magnetic field and gate voltage. first, the authors found that crsbr exhibits a robust layer-dependent magnetism down to the monolayer with a strong magnetic crystal anisotropy: the a, b and c axis being identified as the magnetic intermediate, easy and hard axis, respectively. the extracted magnetic transition temperatures for mono- and bilayer crsbr are summarized in fig. 1. second, throughout both transport and magnetic susceptibility measurements, telford and colleagues observed the development of an additional fm phase aligned with the b axis below 40 k (td). this unexpected behaviour was seen for all layer numbers (most pronounced in the monolayer) and originates from magnetic defects. third, the authors demonstrated that the magnetoresistance ratio (mostly its positive component) can be effectively tuned below td by using the electrostatic gate functionality of their devices. observation of such strong coupling between the charge carriers and magnetic defects informed the authors’ proposal that the source of this hidden regime is self-trapped charges in crsbr, which was not seen in any other isolated 2d magnets.in addition to such electronic transport responses, crsbr is also optically active due to its direct bandgap, which is independent of layer number. wilson and colleagues took the advantage of this property to study its magneto-photoluminescence (pl) response4. by using pl and differential reflection measurement techniques, they probed a high degree of optical anisotropy, in which they observe a strong excitation for polarization along the b axis that later disappears along the a axis. this observation is independent of the magnetic order of the material and is indeed expected because its electronic structure is also highly anisotropic. next, to investigate the effect of magnetic ordering on its optical properties (for example, selection rules for optical transitions can be modified by the magnetic order of the crystal), the authors applied magnetic fields along the easy axis at temperatures below the tn. while the pl of monolayer crsbr lacks any notable magnetic field response, the pl spectrum of bilayer crsbr exhibits a sudden change in energy (redshifts) and intensity (increases) above the saturation field (the critical field that switches the magnetic ordering from afm to fm state). the fields applied along the intermediate and hard axes also result in continuous changes up to saturation fields due to the spin canting process. to explain these results, the authors developed a theory suggesting that a change in the magnetic arrangement of crsbr alters the interlayer electronic coupling, which notably modifies its excitonic properties. similar responses were observed for three and four layers of crsbr as well.these interesting findings in crsbr deserve further investigation. for example, pinpointing the exact origin of magnetic defects may offer new opportunities to further manipulate the characteristics of the hidden magnetic order (for example, transition temperature) observed by telford and colleagues3. furthermore, the rich magnetic character of crsbr could be enhanced by extending the findings of wilson and colleagues4, particularly for the emerging field of twistronics. for instance, this interlayer electronic coupling tuned by magnetic order can be manipulated by creating artificial bilayer systems. finally, the observation of high magnetic transition temperatures and a strong magnetic anisotropy in this air-stable van der waals material suggests that crsbr-based heterostructures may be considered when constructing ultra-compact spintronics devices. in fact, progress in this direction has already begun. for instance, the recent generation of efficient thermal and electrical spin current in graphene/crsbr-based devices5 is a preview of the vast opportunities offered by crsbr.gibertini, m., koperski, m., morpurgo, a. f. & novoselov, k. s. nat. nanotechnol. 14, 408–419 (2019).cas article google scholar telford, e. j. et al. adv. mater. 32, 2003240 (2020).cas article google scholar telford, e. j. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01245-x (2022).article google scholar wilson, n. p. et al. nat. mater. 20, 1657–1662 (2021).cas article google scholar ghiasi, t. s. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 16, 788–794 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesschool of mathematics, statistics and physics, newcastle university, newcastle upon tyne, ukahmet avsaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ahmet avsar.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsavsar, a. highly anisotropic van der waals magnetism. nat. mater. 21, 731–733 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01299-xdownload citationpublished: 29 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01299-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 