the direct use of ammonia for asymmetric synthesis is highly sought after. now, an efficient enantioselective carbene insertion into the n–h bond of ammonia has been developed, producing diverse valuable chiral α-amino acids.you have full access to this article via your institution.as a cheap abundant chemical feedstock, ammonia is one of the most attractive nitrogen sources for the production of fertilizers, functional materials and valuable synthetic intermediates1. however, the direct use of ammonia for catalytic asymmetric synthesis still remains challenging. in fact, to achieve enantioselectivity, two major difficulties are often encountered when developing such reactions; owing to its strong lewis basicity, ammonia can easily deactivate metal catalysts by forming inactive stable metal complexes2, and it is often hard to control the chemoselectivity, especially in monoalkylation reactions where products are more reactive than ammonia.chiral primary amines are valuable synthetic building blocks and pharmaceutical intermediates. conventional asymmetric syntheses of chiral primary amines typically use n-protected amines (such as amides) as the nitrogen sources for the key stereogenic bond formation and then remove the protective group afterwards, thus solving the above problems indirectly3. by contrast, direct catalytic asymmetric transformations of ammonia obviate these multi-step operations, and are thus most desirable and rewarding.now, writing in nature catalysis, qi-lin zhou and co-workers report a highly enantioselective carbene insertion into the n–h bond of ammonia by cooperative action of an achiral copper complex and a chiral thiourea as catalysts (fig. 1)4. this reaction couples a wide variety of diazoesters with ammonia to produce chiral primary amines. notably, the enantioselectivity of this reaction is not controlled in the c–n bond formation step, but in proton transfer of the ylide intermediate, in which the copper-bonded chiral thiourea serves as a chiral proton shuttle.the copper complex tp*cu and chiral thiourea hbd-1 act cooperatively in this process involving sequential metal carbene formation, c–n bond formation and enantiocontrolled ylide proton transfer. mtbe, methyl tert-butyl ether.the team has been working on asymmetric heteroatom–hydrogen bond (x–h; x = n, o, s) insertion reactions for some time. initially, they developed metal carbene insertions into the n–h bond of anilines, and into the o–h bond of alcohols, phenols and even water using chiral copper or iron catalysts5. later, inspired by zhi-xiang yu’s computational study on the o–h bond insertion reaction6, the group of qi-lin zhou successfully applied a cooperative system that merged achiral rhodium catalysts with chiral proton transfer (via chiral phosphoric acids) in the asymmetric carbene insertion reactions of amides, alcohols, water and so on7. recently, they used an achiral copper complex and a chiral amine-thiourea organocatalyst in tandem to accomplish a highly enantioselective insertion into the n–h bond of aliphatic amines8.on the basis of such previous results on aliphatic amines, further evaluation of various chiral thioureas was performed for the insertion of ammonia, which identified amide-thiourea hbd-1 as an effective co-catalyst for excellent asymmetric induction. variation of the hydrotris(pyrazolyl)borate (tp) ligand had little effect on enantioselectivity, but dramatically influenced the yield. to better understand the origin of enantioselectivity, the authors carried out a series of mechanistic experiments. by studying the interaction between hbd-1 and tp*cu spectroscopically and evaluating various chiral amide-thiourea catalysts with different pka values, the authors found that the proton-donating ability of the catalyst plays a critical role in controlling the enantioselectivity. more importantly, the acidity of hbd-1 is enhanced by over 104 times when forming the hbd-1/tp*cu adduct. furthermore, density functional theory calculations indicated that the multiple hydrogen-bond interactions between this adduct and substrate are responsible for stabilizing the favoured transition state.the formation of this adduct is reversible, but heavily favouring the adduct side. in fact, the interaction between hbd-1 and tp*cu is stronger than that between ammonia and tp*cu. however, such a strong interaction is detrimental to the overall reaction rate, as it sequestrates tp*cu, the catalyst for the generation of the carbene complex, which is the rate-determining step. consequently, this reaction exhibits negative saturation kinetics in hbd-1. therefore, the success of this process is the outcome of a delicate balance of different interactions in a complex system.the work reported by zhou and co-workers offers a powerful tool for the synthesis of chiral primary amines by direct asymmetric transformation of ammonia. under the optimized conditions, various alkyl diazoesters were transformed into the corresponding amino acid esters with excellent enantioselectivity. this reaction is tolerant of many functional groups (alkene, alkyne, trifuoromethyl, ether, amide, nitrile and amine) on the alkyl chain of the substrates. it is also possible to use this strategy to introduce an amino acid motif to drug and natural product molecules, including hyodeoxycholic acid, mycophenolic acid and oxaprozin. to further demonstrate the practical utility of this protocol, an anti-cancer drug melphalan and a number of natural and unnatural amino acids were also synthesized.in conclusion, zhou and co-workers have presented an extremely general and mild protocol for the asymmetric carbene insertion into ammonia. enabled by a powerful cooperative catalytic system involving a copper complex and a chiral thiourea, this reaction represents an important milestone in the development of not only enantioselective carbene insertion reactions but also direct asymmetric transformations of ammonia.valera-medina, a., xiao, h., owen-jones, m., david, w. i. f. & bowen, p. j. prog. energy combust. sci. 69, 63–102 (2018).article google scholar bezdek, m. j., guo, s. & chirik, p. j. science 354, 730–733 (2016).cas article google scholar yin, q., shi, y., wang, j. & zhang, x. chem. soc. rev. 49, 6141–6153 (2020).article google scholar li, m.-l., pan, j.-b. & zhou, q.-l. nat. catal. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00779-2 (2022).article google scholar zhu, s.-f. & zhou, q.-l. acc. chem. res. 45, 1365–1377 (2012).cas article google scholar liang, y., zhou, h. & yu, z.-x. j. am. chem. soc. 131, 17783–17785 (2009).cas article google scholar ren, y.-y., zhu, s.-f. & zhou, q.-l. org. biomol. chem. 16, 3087–3094 (2018).cas article google scholar li, m.-l., yu, j.-h., li, y.-h., zhu, s.-f. & zhou, q.-l. science 366, 990–994 (2019).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry and the hong kong branch of chinese national engineering research centre for tissue restoration and reconstruction, the hong kong university of science and technology, kowloon, hong kong sar, chinaliangliang yang & jianwei sunyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jianwei sun.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsyang, l., sun, j. ammonia to chiral α-amino acid. nat catal 5, 471–472 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00811-5download citationpublished: 24 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00811-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 