supported subnanometre catalysts are atom efficient and possess unique properties, but their structure–activity relations are not well understood. now it is possible to reveal their structure sensitivity by combining multimodal experiments and computations.you have full access to this article via your institution.structure sensitivity in heterogeneous metal-catalysed reactions has been of fundamental and practical importance. the term refers to the change of the turnover frequency (tof) of a chemical reaction with particle size. it reveals the active sites and informs approaches to maximize activity by controlling the particle size. numerous catalytic reactions have reported an optimum tof in the nanometre (1–2 nm) regime. much less is known about the reactivity of subnanometre metal catalysts, consisting of small clusters and single atoms1, due to limitations in synthesizing and characterizing them. now, in nature catalysis, yang-gang wang, hongyang liu, wu zhou, ding ma and co-workers present a study aimed at identifying the structure sensitivity of subnanometre pd on carbon for the dehydrogenation of dodecahydro-n-ethylcarbazole2 (fig. 1a). dehydrogenation of large cyclic compounds is relevant to energy storage in the form of hydrogen, where intermittent energy can be captured in the hydrogenated molecules and the h2 released can be used in fuel cells. commercialization interest in the specific catalytic cycle exists in china.a, overall catalytic cycle for h2 storage for fuel cells or intermittent energy. b, stem image showing co-existing single atoms in yellow circles and clusters in white squares. c, tof versus average coordination number (cn) determined using exafs. d, dft-calculated intrinsic dehydrogenation barriers and adsorption energies with respect to the reactant energy of various species versus nuclearity. e, schematic of the synergy of the multimodal analysis. panels a–c adapted from ref. 2, springer nature ltd.the team employed carbon nanodiamond — which features an sp2 hybridized surface and is sp3 hybridized in the bulk — with a sufficient density of defects to anchor and stabilize pd at various loadings. by varying the metal loading, they obtained a library of catalysts of varying nuclearity and group the catalysts into single atoms, clusters and nanoparticles. by analysing high-resolution microscopy and multiple spectroscopic data of the catalyst library, and correlating the findings with reaction data and density functional theory (dft) calculations, they revealed a significant structure sensitivity with the optimum catalyst consisting of small metal clusters.the team used aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (stem) to image single atoms and clusters and identify the fraction of each group in the different catalysts. despite the high density of the defects, single atoms were observed only at a very low loading of 0.07 wt%, whereas layered clusters of a few atoms to 1–2 nm co-existed with single atoms for 0.25–0.4 wt% loadings (fig. 1b). for higher catalyst loadings — for example, 1–2 wt% — typical of heterogeneous catalysts, a small fraction of single atoms still co-exist with nanoparticles (2–10 nm), but the latter dominates and seems to be influenced by the synthesis conditions. h2–o2 titration shows that the catalysts up to 0.4 wt% are highly dispersed but the higher loadings have much lower dispersion, consistent with the stem results. pd 3d xps spectra indicate a metallic state for the higher loadings but a 1.1 ev positive shift for the lowest loadings, characteristic of a more cationic state consistent with bader charge and orbital analysis conducted using dft.high-resolution microscopy alone is insufficient to quantify the time evolution of the size and shape distribution of subnanometre clusters under common reaction conditions3. for these reasons, the team conducts different complementary spectroscopic studies. by correlating diffuse-reflectance infrared spectroscopy as a function of loading and assigning the various peaks to different types of site — based on stem data — the team deconvoluted the spectra to quantify the contribution of different surface metal atoms structures. extended x-ray absorption fine structure (exafs) analysis determined the average coordination number corrected based on the relative abundance of each structure obtained by stem data. the team introduced a site-specific tof to quantify the activity of various sites. the probe reaction tof data shows that single atoms are nearly inactive (fig. 1c) due to the lack of a sufficiently large ensemble of metal atoms. indeed, dft calculations indicate weak to no binding of the n-heterocycles — which are too large to adsorb on single atoms (fig. 1d), moreover the cationic nature of the sa precludes binding. nanoparticles in turn are slightly active, because they bind the dehydrogenated product too strongly, making desorption potentially slow. the first dehydrogenation barrier decreases with increasing nuclearity at the small size limit, but seems to be invariant at larger cluster sizes (fig. 1d). the second dehydrogenation barrier and the binding energy seem to be size sensitive over the entire range studied, suggesting differences in the binding mechanisms. the binding-size trend is opposite to that of the co adsorption on ir catalysts4, reflecting probably the enhanced interaction of the aromatic rings with extended surfaces, which is absent for small molecules. the analysis reveals that clusters with an average coordination number of ~4.4, consisting of ~10–15 atoms, are the most active (fig. 1c). the tof of atomic-layered clusters is 2–5 times higher than that of nanoparticles.the intimate interaction of metal clusters and single atoms with the support and the resulting electronic properties are still poorly understood compared with the case of nanoparticles. in situ and operando spectroscopy have been advanced profoundly and find their way into experimental studies aimed at understanding catalyst structure and stability. however, the analysis of such data in the subnanometre regime remains challenging. first, the low metal loadings force the analyses to be conducted at low signal-to-noise ratios. second, the heterogeneity of the catalyst support can lead to each cluster size having multiple isomeric structures whose spectroscopic signatures could differ, complicating analysis. multiple surface sites are often exposed to reactants, products and intermediates, further convoluting the spectra. third, there is a lack of well-defined spectroscopic reference data on supported subnanometre clusters due to the complex interactions between metal atoms in the cluster and the support.in conventional catalytic systems and especially in single crystals, a single technique often provides conclusive evidence. at the small scale, there is a need to employ complementary techniques. for example, although co typically adsorbs on an extended metal particle with a stoichiometry (number of co molecules per metal atom) of 1, the latter changes for smaller sizes, and hence operando co fourier transform infrared as a sole spectroscopic technique could lead to incorrect analysis. the power of the current studies therefore lies in combining stem, the probe dehydrogenation reaction, multiple spectroscopic methods and performing multimodal method analysis (fig. 1e).the methodology presented in this study can be leveraged for other chemistries. in fact, the activity volcano with respect to nuclearity in the subnanometre regime is emerging as a more frequent than thought phenomenon4. however, the challenges ahead lie in the need to improve and control the synthesis while improving the spatial and temporal resolution of the analysis. computational spectroscopy and data science in conjunction with ab initio calculations and experimental spectroscopy can facilitate the observation of structures at the catalyst dynamics timescale that often escapes experimental observation alone5,6.fu, q., saltsburg, h. & flytzani-stephanopoulos, m. science 301, 935–938 (2003).cas article google scholar dong, c. et al. nat. catal. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00769-4 (2022).article google scholar tang, y. et al. nat. commun. 10, 4488 (2019).article google scholar lu, y. et al. j. mater. chem. a https://doi.org/10.1039/d1ta09740g (2022).article google scholar lansford, j. l. & vlachos, d. g. nat. commun. 11, 1513 (2020).cas article google scholar marcella, n. et al. nat. commun. 13, 832 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemical and biomolecular engineering, university of delaware, newark, de, usasanjana srinivas & dionisios g. vlachosyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to sanjana srinivas or dionisios g. vlachos.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssrinivas, s., vlachos, d.g. tuning at the subnanometre scale. nat catal 5, 467–468 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00807-1download citationpublished: 24 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00807-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 