a diagnostic fragment ion in tandem mass spectrometry enables confident protein lactylation assignment and the discovery of broad lysine modification beyond histones.you have full access to this article via your institution.as the end product of glycolysis, lactate has long been considered a waste product that can cause muscle fatigue and potential tissue damage. research since the 1970s has shifted the lactate paradigm, and now it is clear that lactate is important not only as an intermediate in cellular metabolism1 but also as a signaling molecule mediating cellular communications2. lactate has recently been discovered to modify lysine residues on histones, a post-translational modification called lysine lactylation (kla or klac)3. cellular stress such as hypoxia and bacterial infection induces the production of lactate through glycolysis, which in turn stimulates histone lactylation. this modification on histones not only provides the molecular basis for lactate modulation of gene expression, but also greatly expands biological functions of lactate metabolism. however, in previous analyses by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (lc-ms/ms), the mass shift representing lactylation (+72.021 da) did not offer robust klac detection and restricted lactylation identifications beyond histones. in this issue of nature methods, wan et al. report the discovery of a signature fragment ion, the cyclic immonium (cycim) ion, in ms/ms spectra of klac-containing peptides and used it to confidently identify novel lactylated proteins and modification sites, as well as to discover broader landscape of lactylation beyond histones in the human proteome4.immonium ions were previously used to detect certain amino acid residues or modifications in a peptide mass spectrum5. after scrutinizing the low mass range in ms spectra, the authors found two distinct m/z values corresponding to the linear immonium and cycim ions from klac peptides. of these, the cycim ion occurred more intensely and frequently. wan et al. validated the sensitivity and specificity of the cycim ion for klac detection through in vitro lactylation and metabolic tracing. surprisingly, they got their answer by analyzing two publicly accessible proteome datasets, in which isotopically labeled lysine or glucose resulted in expected mass shift for the cycim ion. moreover, the authors observed a notable increase in c18-filled lc retention time for klac peptides, which can be used as supplementary evidence to provide higher confidence.the highlight of this study was the utilization of the unique fragment ion as the primary diagnostic feature of klac to mine multiple publicly accessible proteome datasets and retrieve many new klac sites on both histones and non-histone proteins (fig. 1). over the years, proteomics studies have generated large volumes of raw experimental data and inferred biological results, which have been uploaded to several centralized data repositories accessible to proteomics researchers and biologists alike. wan et al. took advantage of them and made some interesting observations. they noted that the identified klac proteins were not confined to the nucleus but also found in cytoplasm. among them, many enzymes involved in glycolysis, such as fructose bisphosphate aldolase a (aldoa), were heavily lactylated, and the lactylation on k147 of aldoa was conserved across most human and mouse cell lines in the datasets they mined. enzymatic assays on aldoa with or without with lactylation on k147 revealed reduced enzymatic activity with the modification, leading to the proposal that lactylation triggers a negative feedback loop. specific lactylation on other enzymes such as α-enolase (eno1) could disrupt substrate–enzyme interaction, a possibility that was supported by a thermal stability assay. potential post-translational modification crosstalk was suggested, as the authors discovered most of these conserved lactylation sites have been reported to bear other modifications — for example, acetylation and ubiquitylation.a previously unnoticed protein modification on lysine residues by the well-known metabolite lactate proves extensive upon mining public proteomics data repositories.finally, wan et al. observed widespread lactylation in the human proteome upon data-mining human tissue proteome datasets. among newly discovered high-confidence lactylated proteins, dehydrogenase reductase 7 (dhrs7) stood out across different human tissue samples. the specific lactylation on k321 is conserved in all human tissue samples, and previous discoveries of methylation and ubiquitylation on the same site suggests its potential importance. the authors demonstrated its relevance by mutating the site, which greatly affected the cellular metabolomic profile. however, an attempt to alter the lactylation occupancy through co-transfecting histone deacetylase (hdac3) was not successful, signaling overall challenges in the investigation of the function of lactylation on non-histone proteins.the work of wan et al. provides a useful method to improve confidence in high-throughput identification of novel and unique protein modifications by ms and highlights the potential of analyzing proteomic data commons. they used this strategy to reveal broader-scale lactylation beyond histones by mining a large volume of raw spectra in data repositories. unexpectedly, multiple lactylation events are apparently abundant, at least on metabolic proteins, but without a proper tool, even with data in hand this modification had been unnoticed. the annotation by the authors also revealed the intriguing fact that many of these lactylation sites were previously reported as sites of other modifications, indicating that the modification is highly specific and regulated. obviously, there is much work left to explore this newly discovered protein modification. the whole scope of biological functions of this modification needs to be investigated. as the design of experiments to characterize the function of lactylation on non-histone proteins presents a challenge, it is critical to identify important ‘writers’ (lactyltransferases) and ‘erasers’ (delactylases) acting on conserved lactylation sites.this study also points to potential crosstalk between lactylation and other modifications to be explored in the future. as most of the available proteome datasets were generated using trypsin in the digestion step, lactylation occurring primarily on lysine residues can result in lower ionization efficiency and longer peptides with miscleavage sites, leading to difficulty in the detection and identification of lactylated peptides. accordingly, low-abundance lactylated peptides are likely masked by overwhelming unmodified peptides in mass spectra. understandably, the authors mainly identified the modification on relatively high-abundance metabolic enzymes through mining of existing unenriched proteome datasets. therefore, we expect pre-enrichment of lactylated proteins or peptides to have an advantage at giving us a more complete picture of proteome lactylation under different cellular states. however, the utilization of diagnostic cycim ion in the ms/ms spectra of lactylated peptides will facilitate confident identification of low-abundance lactylation events in future studies. the ability to use publicly accessible datasets to explore novel modifications remains a sensible strategy. for example, the protein n-terminal amino group has functional reactivities similar to those of lysine residues. on this basis, it is conceivable that the n-terminal amino group is reactive with lactate, with less conformational hindrance, and this might provide expanded understanding of the function of lactylation.ferguson, b. s. et al. eur. j. appl. physiol. 118, 691–728 (2018).cas article google scholar certo, m., tsai, c. h., pucino, v., ho, p. c. & mauro, c. nat. rev. immunol. 21, 151–161 (2021).cas article google scholar zhang, d. et al. nature 574, 575–580 (2019).cas article google scholar wan, n. et al. nat. methods https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01523-1 (2022).article pubmed google scholar muroski, j. m., fu, j. y., nguyen, h. h., ogorzalek loo, r. r. & loo, j. a. proteomics 21, e2000111 (2021).article google scholar download referencesthis project was funded by nih grant 1rf1ag064250.department of chemistry, purdue university, west lafayette, in, usaxiaofeng wu & w. andy taodepartment of biochemistry, purdue university, west lafayette, in, usaw. andy taocenter for cancer research, purdue university, west lafayette, in, usaw. andy taoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to xiaofeng wu or w. andy tao.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionswu, x., tao, w.a. uncovering ubiquitous protein lactylation. nat methods 19, 793–794 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01536-wdownload citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01536-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 