years of research on adaptation to climate change shows that many efforts are counterproductively increasing vulnerability, rather than reducing it — known as ‘maladaptation’. now a study suggests ways forward by identifying four structural challenges that need to be overcome in adaptation implementation.you have full access to this article via your institution.research on adaptation to climate change has sharply increased over the past decade1 and implementation of strategies and projects is rapidly following suit, although funding lags behind that for mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions2. at the same time, studies indicate a lack of clarity in identifying successful3 or effective4 adaptation; as a result, projects are rarely able to address climate risk5 and can introduce a host of new problems6. while adaptation is needed more than ever, emerging evidence shows that a non-trivial number of adaptation projects are actually leading to maladaptation, which is when the adaptation process ends up making people more, rather than less, vulnerable to climate change. writing in environmental sociology, amanda bertana et al7. attempt to address this directly through an explicit empirical exploration of the process that leads to maladaptation in order to develop a framework for how to avoid it.previous studies have identified some knowledge of what leads to maladaptation — for example, when projects have a poor understanding of what causes vulnerability to climate change8 — and have contributed a robust effort to classify adaptation types9. however, unpacking maladaptation remains one of the frontiers of adaptation knowledge10. one challenge for understanding maladaptation is how to identify it in real time, rather than ex post, which is typically when it is found and when little can be done to address it. scholars and practitioners are in agreement that methodologies for better assessing maladaptation are sorely needed11.one knowledge barrier is undoubtedly that maladaptation is rarely the object of study, but rather emerges as a finding, often in a case study. the value of the approach of bertana et al. is that it draws on 22 semi-structured interviews with climate change adaptation practitioners involved in some aspect of planning, implementing and evaluating projects. by focusing on the project process, rather than only on the outcomes, they are able to capture four structural challenges that contribute to maladaptation.first, bertana et al. emphasize that a focus on technological fixes emerges from a narrow and short-sighted understanding of adaptation. they describe engineering solutions that lack flexibility and can lock in undesirable development pathways. this echoes multiple empirical examples of coastal protection infrastructure around the world that causes new problems, such as in fiji where a sea wall was built to protect from sea-level rise but designers overlooked the need to allow for stormwater drainage on the inside, thus causing floods in the settlement (fig. 1)12.dpa picture alliance/alamy stock photo.a wall protects coastal communities from being flooded, but also serves to retain stormwater and the waste that it collects.second, they point to the age-old problem of attempting to distinguish between adaptation and development, which has been the focus of much scholarly lament13. it is a legacy of countries seeking to ensure that climate finance would be additional to official development assistance, but in reality there is no blueprint for what distinguishes the two14. this confusion facilitates maladaptation because development projects are often relabelled as adaptation projects without any deeper reflection about what might need to change — thus climate change risk is not the focus and consequently outcomes can undermine efforts to reduce risk.third, the tradition in development practice to translate qualitative information into indicators means that descriptive, contextual evidence of adaptation effectiveness is relegated to proxies that are not an accurate portrayal of reality. this echoes other calls for more effective adaptation evaluation that incorporates learning processes and does not hang success on quantification11. maladaptation emerges from this because with inaccurate indicators, we cannot ensure that projects result in adaptation.finally, bertana et al. note how mainstreaming adaptation into planning processes remains an enormous challenge when other, apparently more urgent and important, problems take priority. as a result, adaptation is marginalized and lack of attention makes it ineffective, and subsequently it can fall to maladaptation.while this study ultimately does not find anything that has not already been covered by other recent studies, the emphasis on studying maladaptation as a process is an important contribution to advance knowledge.given the increasing impacts of climate change, adaptation is a must. at the same time, global warming is a very real limit to adaptation strategies. the ipcc points to growing evidence that some adaptation strategies will be useless above 1.5 °c average warming2. this means there is a limited margin for getting adaptation right. but inability to predict maladaptation accurately before it happens should not itself be seen as one of the limits to adaptation. rather, the concept brings several necessary dimensions to the discussion. it serves as a warning that not all responses to climate risk are ‘good’15, and shows that the structural problems in development practice that have been critiqued for decades are being repeated in adaptation projects. bertana et al., for example, note how none of the interviewees were involved in each aspect of the arch of adaptation projects from conceptualization through implementation to evaluation, resulting in a lack of holistic understanding of the process among practitioners. but above all, the utility in the concept of maladaptation is how it demonstrates that when adaptation is implemented to address only the impacts of climate change (or, as bertana et al. say, a ‘buffer’), rather than the underlying drivers of what makes people vulnerable to climate change in the first place — such as gender inequity, marginalization of certain ethnic groups and other power inequalities — it is unlikely to be effective.nalau, j. & verrall, b. clim. risk manag. 32, 100290 (2021).article google scholar ipcc climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability (eds pörtner, h.-o. et al.) (cambridge univ. press, 2022).dilling, l. et al. nat. clim. change 9, 572–574 (2019).article google scholar singh, c. et al. clim. dev. https://doi.org/10.1080/17565529.2021.1964937 (2021).article google scholar berrang-ford, l. et al. nat. clim. change 11, 989–1000 (2021).article google scholar eriksen, s. e. et al. world dev. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105383 (2021).article google scholar bertana, a., clark, b., benney, t. m. & quackenbush, c. environ. sociol. https://doi.org/10.1080/23251042.2022.2068224 (2022).article google scholar work, c., rong, v., song, d. & scheidel, a. clim. policy 19, s47–s62 (2019).article google scholar juhola, s., glaas, e., linnér, b. o. & neset, t. s. environ. sci. policy 55, 135–140 (2016).article google scholar magnan, a. k., schipper, e. l. f. & duvat, v. curr. clim. change rep. 6, 166–177 (2020).article google scholar adaptation gap report 2021: the gathering storm – adapting to climate change in a post-pandemic world (unep, 2021).piggott-mckellar, a. e., nunn, p. d., mcnamara, k. e. & sekinini, s. t. in managing climate change adaptation in the pacific region (ed. leal filho, w.) 69–84 (climate change management, springer, 2020); https://doi.org/hz39webber, s. geogr. compass 10, 401–413 (2016).article google scholar schipper, e. l. f. et al. world dev. perspect. 18, 100205 (2020).article google scholar eriksen, s. et al. clim. dev. 3, 7–20 (2011).article google scholar download referencesenvironmental change institute, university of oxford, oxford, uke. lisa f. schipperyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to e. lisa f. schipper.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsschipper, e.l.f. catching maladaptation before it happens. nat. clim. chang. 12, 617–618 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01409-2download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01409-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 