fruit flies injected with magnetic nanoparticles and genetically modified to sensitize neural circuits to the rate of change in temperature have enabled subsecond behavioural responses to magnetic stimuli and multi-channel magnetic control.you have full access to this article via your institution.an ever-expanding and evolving toolkit of techniques for targeted stimulation of awake and freely behaving animals has aided scientists in their efforts to untangle the workings of the nervous system. these techniques typically share the same underlying approach, introducing genetic changes to targeted groups of neurons in model organisms that sensitize them to a controllably applied stimulus, with examples including light1, heat2, designer drugs3 or magnetic fields4,5,6. each technique entails a distinct set of advantages and disadvantages, and interest in using magnetic fields has been driven primarily by the appeal of employing an immediate and invisible stimulus that is unimpeded by tissue and can easily and harmlessly reach targeted neurons.synthetic magnetic nanoparticles, which exhibit magnetic moments large enough to enable robust interaction with applied magnetic fields, offer a means of wireless control when directly injected at a targeted site. in the presence of magnetic fields alternating at frequencies of kilohertz to megahertz, the heat dissipated collectively by these nanoparticles has been demonstrated to raise the surrounding temperature. if nearby neurons have been genetically modified to express heat-sensitive channel proteins, then targeted neural activity can be triggered, an approach commonly referred to as ‘magnetothermal stimulation’4,5. unfortunately, the time elapsed between the application of the magnetic stimulus and the onset of activity has previously been limited to seconds or tens of seconds for magnetothermal stimulation, whereas a more immediate response is desirable.writing in nature materials, jacob robinson and colleagues report a magnetothermal stimulation approach that achieves subsecond responses in fruit flies, highlighting two key accomplishments that could help to advance the technology7. first, by expressing trpa1-a, a channel protein that responds to the rate of change in temperature rather than requiring a threshold temperature to be reached, they can elicit more rapid behavioural responses to magnetic stimuli (fig. 1). observing changes in wing angle as a rapid behavioural readout, responses to magnetic stimuli within hundreds of milliseconds are shown. second, robinson and colleagues offer the first known demonstration of multi-channel magnetothermal control over awake, freely behaving animals. magnetic materials with substantially different coercivity are optimally heated by alternating magnetic fields that have distinct amplitudes and frequencies8. by employing 40 nm iron oxide clusters as a low-coercivity material and 15 nm co-doped iron oxide nanoparticles as a high-coercivity material, an appropriate selection of alternating magnetic field conditions enables selective heating of subpopulations of flies injected with different materials, even as they are exposed to the same alternating field (fig. 2).heat dissipated in an alternating magnetic field increases the internal temperature of the fly, triggering the opening of channel proteins sensitive to rate of change in temperature. a distribution of observed lag times between application of the magnetic stimulus and behavioural response of individual flies is shown with a box plot, in which the centre line represents the median with bottom and top edges of the box representing 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively, with whiskers extending to extreme data points not considered outliers. t, temperature; t, time. figure adapted with permission from ref. 7, springer nature ltd.a magnetic stimulus with an amplitude of 80 mt alternating at 49.9 khz selectively heats 15 nm co-doped iron oxide nanoparticles with high coercivity, whereas undoped 40 nm iron oxide nanoclusters with lower coercivity are selectively heated by a magnetic stimulus of comparatively lower amplitude and higher frequency (12 mt, 555 khz). injecting separate fruit flies with these distinct magnetic materials allows for independent actuation of their behavioural response. figure adapted with permission from ref. 7, springer nature ltd.claims of controlling neuronal activity with magnetic stimuli have been a plentiful source of controversy and lively debate in recent years, particularly in cases where mechanisms based on the genetically expressed iron storage protein ferritin have been asserted9. the fact that robinson and colleagues instead use concentrated suspensions of synthetic magnetic materials and argue that mild bulk heating of about 1 °c distributed over the entire fly can account for stimulation should help to make the underlying mechanism more plausible, even for highly sceptical readers. subsecond magnetothermal stimulation is a striking achievement relative to prior reports and compared with recently described mechanical transduction methods, which also exhibited delays of the order of a few seconds6. their demonstration of multi-channel behavioural response paves the way for intriguing extensions such as controlling subpopulations of a heterogenous swarm or selective control over independent neural circuits in larger organisms via separate injection sites.despite its promise, robinson and colleagues are also careful to note that translating their approach into mammalian model organisms will be challenging. this is partly because the specific channel protein leveraged here is unsuitable at warmer body temperatures, although channel proteins that perform an analogous function at 37 °c may eventually be identified or designed. moreover, the small size of fruit flies makes them an especially expedient choice as a model organism from the perspective of simplifying the requirements of the necessary magnetic instrumentation. while scaling up similar instruments to the working volumes required for freely behaving rodents is certainly possible, the increased difficulty, power and expense associated would be important factors to consider when weighing alternatives for targeted stimulation in larger animals10. reducing the stimulus time required to elicit a behavioural response may also serve as a step towards enabling the pulsed or intermittent generation of alternating fields, a strategy that could reduce the complexity of magnetic stimulation.major hurdles will clearly need to be overcome for the techniques described by robinson and colleagues to become truly competitive with more widespread optical neurostimulation methods. nevertheless, their striking results with fruit flies show that magnetothermal stimulation, and materials-based neurostimulation techniques more generally, is an area in which substantial further development and advancement remain possible.deisseroth, k. nat. neurosci. 18, 1213–1225 (2015).cas article google scholar bath, d. e. et al. nat. methods 11, 756–762 (2014).cas article google scholar sternson, s. m. & roth, b. l. annu. rev. neurosci. 37, 387–407 (2014).cas article google scholar chen, r., romero, g., christiansen, m. g., mohr, a. & anikeeva, p. science 347, 1477–1480 (2015).cas article google scholar munshi, r. et al. elife 6, e27069 (2017).article google scholar lee, j.-u. et al. nat. mater. 20, 1029–1036 (2021).cas article google scholar sebesta, c. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01281-7 (2022).article google scholar moon, j. et al. adv. funct. mater. 30, 2000577 (2020).cas article google scholar meister, m. elife 5, e17210 (2016).article google scholar christiansen, m. g., howe, c. m., bono, d. c., perreault, d. j. & anikeeva, p. rev. sci. instrum. 88, 084301 (2017).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of health sciences and technology, institute for translational medicine, eth zurich, zurich, switzerlandmichael g. christiansen & simone schuerleyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to michael g. christiansen.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionschristiansen, m.g., schuerle, s. multi-channel control of fruit fly behaviour. nat. mater. 21, 840–842 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01305-2download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01305-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 