an adhesive hydrogel patch made from off-the-shelf materials seals and aids the healing of gastrointestinal-tissue defects without the need for sutures, as shown with the repair of gastrointestinal leaks in live rats and pigs.you have full access to this article via your institution.anastomotic procedures in the gastrointestinal tract can be technically demanding1. they are performed during surgery for bowel cancers, inflammatory bowel disease or other gastrointestinal conditions, and involve the sewing or stapling of the two ends of the severed tract after the resection of the diseased segment of tissue. leaks after anastomosis — which occur for about 10% of the procedures — can be deadly2, as leaked gastrointestinal fluid can put the patient at imminent risk of sepsis and other life-threatening complications. to limit leaks, surgeons routinely use patches of fibrin or other adhesives, applied directly after suturing or stapling, to support the reconnected tissue. however, the containment of leaks by such support materials is inadequate; in particular, many adhesives are degraded within hours of contact with digestive gastrointestinal fluid. in fact, for the most part, fibrin glue3 and other surgical adhesives have not reduced the incidence rate of complications after gastrointestinal anastomosis. reporting in science translational medicine, xuanhe zhao, christoph nabzdyk, leigh griffiths, hyunwoo yuk and colleagues now describe the design and performance of an easy-to-manufacture and slowly degrading adhesive patch for supporting, and even replacing, the commonly performed stitching-and-stapling procedures involved in gastrointestinal anastomosis4.zhao and co-authors’ off-the-shelf adhesive patch consists of a non-adhesive backing layer of hydrophilic polyurethane on top of an adhesive contact layer made of blends of n-hydroxysuccinimidyl-functionalized polyacrylic acid and polyvinyl alcohol. the backing layer prevents the swelling of the polymer-hydrogel layer under wet conditions, and is mounted on a lining of removable sterilized weighing paper. the patch attaches to target tissues in a single step (fig. 1), owing to the hydrophilic and hygroscopic character of the adhesive hydrogel, which first forms hydrogen bonds with the tissue surface, followed by covalent crosslinking via amide bonds. the authors show that the mechanical properties of the patch are comparable to those of abdominal tissues and that, in the swollen state, the patch can withstand burst pressures larger than 24 kpa (and larger than 40 kpa 5 minutes after application). in rats and pigs with gastrointestinal leaks made by creating large circular lesions on tissues of the animals’ colon or stomach, comparisons of the performance of the patch and of suturing revealed that the patch sealed and repaired the defects with outcomes that were often indistinguishable from those of the sutured lesions. suturing took more than two minutes, yet the patch was applied within five seconds. the authors also show that the biocompatibilities of the patch and of clinically used adhesives (specifically coseal) are comparable but that the degradation kinetics of the patch is substantially slower (in rats, the patch was largely degraded 12 weeks after application), and that the patch’s adhesive performance (according to measurements of shear and tensile strengths and of interfacial toughness in ex vivo porcine tissue) is superior to those of three commercial tissue adhesives and sealants (coseal, tisseel and histoacryl).the patch consists of an adhesive layer that swells when in contact with wet tissue, a backing non-adhesive layer, and a liner that is removed after the application of the patch (via gentle pressing) on the tissue defect in the gastrointestinal tract.sutures and staples allow for complex and life-saving tissue reconnections, such as end-to-side anastomoses (for example, a roux-en-y bypass) and side-to-side anastomoses. however, stapled or sutured tissues may manifest a deadly leak only days after a seemingly successful surgery5. therefore, although a leak can be blamed on a number of factors (including inadequate tissue healing and poor suturing), sutures and staples can also act as stable in-tissue anchors, limiting the propagation of fluid leakage when it occurs. for adhesive patches to fulfil these functions, they would require optimized designs and dimensions that mimic the geometries of commonly performed anastomoses.sealants that bind to multiple tissues and that do so under wet conditions6,7,8 have rarely been designed and tested under the conditions of a gastrointestinal anastomotic leak9. the potential impact of digestive fluid on the patch’s performance underscores the need for extensive ex vivo and in vivo testing and benchmarking against gold-standard clinical procedures (sutures and staples, also in combination with fibrin glue or other tissue adhesives) and under the conditions of a harsh leak. in general, surgical tissue adhesives are developed and tested for use during surgery or shortly after it. adhesives for sutureless anastomosis and for the subsequent containment of effluents would need to rely on chemistries that are resistant to digestive fluids and on multiple mechanisms of adhesion, including strong anchoring to the tissue under chemically harsh conditions (fig. 2a). such criteria may preclude the use of ph-responsive moieties such as polyacrylic acid, yet may favour the use of tissue-penetrating polymer networks9 that minimize swelling in physiological conditions and also during a leak. furthermore, the design and performance testing of the chemistry of the adhesives should account for the diversity of digestive fluids present in the abdominal cavity, as they vary in content (for instance, secretions from the bile duct contain lipid-digesting molecules, and intestinal fluid contains bacteria and enzymes; fig. 2b) and ph (1–2 in the stomach; 6.5–7.5 in the healthy intestine, and about 5.5 when there is ulcerative colitis; and 7.5–8 in the pancreas). the tissue adhesives should also account for changes in ph, and for the temporary dilation and swelling of gastrointestinal tissue caused by the processes of digestion.a, mechanisms for the chemical or mechanical adhesion of biomaterials to tissues. b, enzymes (pink circles and yellow pac-man-like shapes), ph and bacteria (blue cylinders) can all affect the function of tissue adhesives and sealants for the gastrointestinal tract. c, the screening and evaluation of adhesion mechanisms and materials ex vivo should include mechanical and rheological testing in the presence of digestive effluents. d, animal models that better mimic the conditions of digestive-fluid leakage following gastrointestinal anastomosis are needed.it is also important to consider the shortcomings of animal models of gastrointestinal anastomosis10. particularly, the incidence rates of leaks in these models can be highly variable, and they do not adequately mimic impaired healing in the presence of a leak (fig. 2c). moreover, ischaemic conditions and co-morbidities (such as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases) frequently present in patients affected by gastrointestinal anastomotic leaks are challenging to implement in animal models, even though they are key determinants of the healing process. nonetheless, adhesion strength over time and, to some extent, also leak containment, can be well studied in porcine models with standardized defects (fig. 2d). however, the availability of large-animal models that mimic anastomotic insufficiency and the wound-healing complications typically faced by patients with co-morbidities will be necessary to facilitate the clinical translation of new adhesives.all in all, post-surgical complications after an anastomotic procedure, especially the instability of anastomosed tissue and gastrointestinal leaking, are difficult problems to solve solely through tissue sealants and adhesives. an adhesive suture support material is likely to be easier to translate and have higher chances of clinical success if designed specifically for the intended applications, be it to support the anastomotic site, to contain the leak or to aid long-term healing. as exemplified by zhao and colleagues’ work, hydrogel patches could be designed to support surgeons during complex anastomosis procedures by reducing the technical complexity of the surgery, by providing a sutureless and easy-to-apply sealant or, alternatively, by developing new types of adhesion material that withstand the chemically harsh environments in the gastrointestinal tract. yet, in all cases, the performance of new surgical adhesives needs to be benchmarked against fibrin glue and other surgical sealants under realistic clinically relevant conditions, in particular the presence of digestive effluents.foppa, c., ng, s. c., montorsi, m. & spinelli, a. eur. j. surg. oncol. 46, 943–954 (2020).article google scholar hammond, j., lim, s., wan, y., gao, x. & patkar, a. j. gastrointest. surg. 18, 1176–1185 (2014).article google scholar nordentoft, t., pommergaard, h.-c., rosenberg, j. & achiam, m. p. eur. surg. res. 54, 1–13 (2015).cas article google scholar wu, j. et al. sci. transl. med. 14, eabh2857 (2022).cas article google scholar tan, w. p., hong, e. y., phillips, b., isenberg, g. a. & goldstein, s. d. am. surg. 80, 868–872 (2014).article google scholar annabi, n. et al. nano today 9, 574–589 (2014).cas article google scholar li, j. et al. science 357, 378–381 (2017).cas article google scholar yuk, h. et al. nature 575, 169–174 (2019).cas article google scholar anthis, a. h. c. et al. adv. funct. mater. 31, 2007099 (2021).cas article google scholar yauw, s. t. k., wever, k. e., hoesseini, a., ritskes-hoitinga, m. & van goor, h. br. j. surg. 102, 726–734 (2015).cas article google scholar download referencesnanoparticle systems engineering laboratory, institute of energy and process engineering (iepe), department of mechanical and process engineering (d-mavt), eth zurich, zurich, switzerlandalexandre h. c. anthis & inge k. herrmannparticles-biology interactions, department of materials meet life, swiss federal laboratories for materials science and technology (empa), st. gallen, switzerlandalexandre h. c. anthis & inge k. herrmanndepartment of visceral surgery and transplantation, university hospital zurich, zurich, switzerlandandrea a. schlegelcenter for preclinical research, fondazione irccs ca’ granda ospedale maggiore policlinico, milan, italyandrea a. schlegelclinic for visceral surgery, cantonal hospital aarau, aarau, switzerlandmark hartelyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to inge k. herrmann.a.h.c.a. and i.k.h. are inventors on the patent application ‘kit comprising adhesive hydrogel and impregnating fluid’ (pct/ep2022/051137). the other authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsanthis, a.h.c., schlegel, a.a., hartel, m. et al. sutureless gastrointestinal anastomoses. nat. biomed. eng (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-022-00900-7download citationpublished: 27 june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-022-00900-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 