could hydrogen sulphide be the new nitric oxide? katharine sanderson reports on the rotten-egg gas that is earning a reputation in human physiology.you have full access to this article via your institution.when rui wang saw the painted easter eggs his ten-year old daughter had brought home from school in 1998, he was unaware of the stink they were about to create. the eggs were proudly displayed as objects of art in the family's glass cabinet. then one day, says wang, ?i came home and the whole house was filled with a stinky smell?. one of the eggs had fractured, and the distinctive whiff of hydrogen sulphide filled the air.somewhere in us the hydrogen sulphide is still knocking about. phil moore what might be garbage for one man was inspiration for wang, then a cardiovascular researcher at the university of saskatchewan in saskatoon, canada. he was already studying nitric oxide and carbon monoxide, gases produced in tiny quantities by the body that have potent physiological effects. the stench emanating from the cracked egg coincided with wang's desire to seek more gases that are important in human biology. ?hydrogen sulphide jumped out from both my home and my head,? says wang, now working at lakehead university in thunder bay, ontario. he quickly bought a canister of the gas and applied it to his cultures of rat vascular tissue. the work culminated in the discovery that hydrogen sulphide is made by the tissue, and can lower blood pressure1.since then, many researchers have turned their attention to hydrogen sulphide and its role in human physiology. in the past year alone, wang and others have demonstrated how the body manufactures the gas, along with a plausible way that it could be modifying a whole range of metabolic proteins. on the clinical side, the gas has been implicated in inflammation and shown to protect the heart. and next month will see the first conference dedicated entirely to hydrogen sulphide, organized by wang and held in shanghai.some researchers now think that hydrogen sulphide is poised to have as big an impact on biology as nitric oxide did ? and that impact was very large indeed. the discovery of nitric oxide's role as a signalling molecule in the cardiovascular system won three scientists the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1998, opened up a huge new field of physiology and, as it turned out, helped to boost the profits of pharmaceutical companies: the erectile dysfunction drug viagra (sildenafil) is now known to work by enhancing the release of nitric oxide.salvador moncada at the wellcome research laboratories in beckenham, uk, started nitric oxide's rise to fame when he showed2 in 1987 that it accounted for the activity of a sought-after and mysterious agent known as endothelium-derived relaxing factor (edrf), which relaxes blood vessels. the idea that cells could be making a gas in the body ? particularly one known mainly as an air pollutant ? was ?a very strange concept?, says pharmacologist phil moore of kings college, london.but once it sank in, the concept generated a tremendous thrill. moore recalls being asked by university librarians to stop lecturing about moncada's discovery because voracious students were razoring the paper out of library copies of nature. nitric oxide has since been established as a key signalling molecule that is involved in processes ranging from neurotransmission to immune-system regulation. and in the mid 1990s it became apparent that it wasn't the only 'gasotransmitter', when researchers showed that carbon monoxide also acted in cell signalling.  pungent potential  hydrogen sulphide wasn't an obvious candidate to join the list of gasotransmitters, being known mainly for its smell and toxicity (a dose of more than 700 parts per million can kill a human). wang's discovery that hydrogen sulphide could have a beneficial role in blood vessels was a ?second coming?, says moore, who immediately started working on the gas. moore and others say that the human body's ability to use hydrogen sulphide could be an evolutionary legacy from microbes that used it as a source of nutrients: ?somewhere in us the hydrogen sulphide is still knocking about.?knocking about isn't the same as doing something important, and wang knew that he needed to show the mechanism by which the gas is made to strengthen the case that it is vital in mammalian physiology. in 2004, he contacted neuroscientist solomon snyder at johns hopkins university in baltimore, maryland. back in 1990, snyder had discovered an enzyme responsible for producing nitric oxide3, and wang wondered whether snyder could help him do the same for hydrogen sulphide.wang arrived in snyder's lab already armed with mice that he had engineered to remove the enzyme cystathionine-γ-lyase (cse). this enzyme is involved in hydrogen sulphide production in bacteria, and wang hoped that the mutant mice would show it could do the same in mammals. they did. in october last year, wang and snyder reported in science that their knockout mice had low concentrations of the gas in the heart and suffered from hypertension4. the paper catapulted hydrogen sulphide into the scientific limelight, says matt whiteman from the peninsula medical school in exeter, uk, who is looking at hydrogen sulphide concentrations in patients with arthritis and diabetes: ?it has given the field more credibility.?snyder says that nitric oxide can no longer be viewed as the only edrf. the nobel winners, he says, ?showed that it was an edrf, they didn't show it was the only edrf?. snyder has evidence that hydrogen sulphide accounts for more of the vessel-relaxing activity of edrf than nitric oxide does. the two gases seem to act in very different ways though. nitric oxide activates an enzyme called guanylyl cyclase, initiating a chain of events that relaxes the muscles in blood-vessel walls. hydrogen sulphide reaches the same end by activating atp-sensitive potassium channels1.it is surprising that there would be any system like nitric oxide without a backup. giuseppe cirino the work on cse-knockout mice and subsequent unpublished findings are enough to convince snyder that ?hydrogen sulphide is potentially more exciting?, than nitric oxide. others in the field remain cautious about the risk of overstating its biological status. ?it would be like when the beatles said they were bigger than jesus,? says whiteman.snyder's unpublished work could explain his faith: he thinks he has found an important mechanism by which hydrogen sulphide acts. snyder drew on parallels with nitric oxide to work this out. nitric oxide often acts through a process called nitrosylation, whereby a part of the nitric oxide molecule attaches itself to a specific amino acid in a protein, often inhibiting the protein's activity. that amino acid is a sulphur-containing one, called cysteine.snyder says that hydrogen sulphide is working by a parallel process he calls sulphydration, and that this could be an entirely new way to modify proteins and influence their activity. sulphydration works by furnishing cysteine with an additional sulphur atom. the atom reacts with a protruding, reactive part of the cysteine that contains a sulphur?hydrogen (s?h) bond, converting it into a sulphur?sulphur?hydrogen bond that pokes even further out from the body of the protein. ?it is more exposed,? explains snyder, making it accessible for further chemical reactions.the consequences of sulphydration are more profound than those of nitrosylation, snyder says. his tests so far have shown that nitrosylation affects roughly 1 in every 100 protein molecules in a given sample, whereas sulphydration seems to affect one in every 10?20 proteins. this could be because hydrogen sulphide is less selective than nitric oxide about which cysteines in a protein it reacts with.snyder says he has good evidence that sulphydration opens the potassium channels that lead to blood vessel relaxation, and that it alters the activity of at least 40 proteins in the liver. one protein he has examined closely is the enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gapdh) which is involved in glycolysis, the process by which glucose is broken down to supply fuel to cells. when gapdh is nitrosylated, its ability to catalyse the reaction is lowered; with hydrogen sulphide the picture is dramatically reversed. ?if you sulphydrate gapdh you increase its activity 700% in vivo,? snyder says. ?the bottom line is sulphydration is a new mode of post-translational modification of proteins, probably comparable in prevalence and influence to phosphorylation,? he says, referring to another widespread protein modification that is vital for all manner of cell functions. snyder says that sulphydration could be important to explain the control of many metabolic processes besides glycolysis. ?the regulation of metabolic pathways was largely worked out 50 years ago. the question is what turns them on and off? how do hormones and other signals regulate metabolism? that hasn't been adequately addressed.  wait and see  so far, snyder's work has been published only in outline5, and researchers say that they are waiting to see it in full before judging it for themselves. whiteman agrees that snyder's hypothesis is plausible: ?what he's seeing makes sense with my observations as well,? he says. sulphydration ?would be a major breakthrough,? wang adds.but whereas snyder puts hydrogen sulphide centre stage in cellular signalling, others in the field think that the gas could be the body's second fiddle ? there to offer support when something goes wrong with nitric oxide. ?it is surprising that there would be any system like nitric oxide without a backup,? says giuseppe cirino from the university of naples federico ii, italy. ?we are talking about a system that is important for survival.?when it comes to controlling vasculature, for example, cirino has found that hydrogen sulphide becomes particularly important in the body if the endothelium of blood vessels ? the thin lining that regulates blood flow and produces nitric oxide ? is damaged so that nitric oxide production drops6. he and his collaborators studied men's corpus cavernosum, the penile tissue that fills with blood during an erection when stimulation causes the nervous system to release nitric oxide and relax the blood vessels. (viagra mimics this by releasing nitric oxide into the corpus cavernosum.) cirino and his colleagues took strips of smooth muscle from this tissue that lacked blood-vessel endothelium and hence weren't making nitric oxide. ?hydrogen sulphide can relax tissue in the absence of the endothelium,? says cirino. ?the next question is why, and the question after that is how.?  delivery details  the why and how would be easier to answer if researchers had a way to control the delivery of hydrogen sulphide to tissues, and moore has developed a molecule able to do so. it is an organic, water-soluble molecule that slowly releases hydrogen sulphide in a way that can generate physiological concentrations better than a direct shot of the gas itself. moore has applied for a patent on this molecule, which he hopes to use to study hydrogen sulphide's effects on the cardiovascular system, and perhaps to deliver it therapeutically7.other groups are also seeking ways to use hydrogen sulphide in the clinic. ?we're most excited by the idea that low levels of hydrogen sulphide therapies have very, very significant effects in reducing cell damage,? says cardiac researcher david lefer at emory university school of medicine in atlanta, georgia. in work that has yet to be published, lefer has used single shots of hydrogen sulphide to try to shield mice from the effects of a simulated heart attack. the gas seems to promote the production of powerful antioxidants and enzymes that protect against cell damage, he explains. ?it looks like there's a programme of protection we can develop with a single exposure.? lefer says the work might lead to a therapy that could be taken by patients before major heart surgery.whiteman has been examining the role of the gas in inflammation. he looked at the synovial fluid from the joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis ? a chronic inflammatory disease ? as well as osteoarthritis, a degenerative disease of cartilage. those with rheumatoid arthritis had high concentrations of hydrogen sulphide in their synovial fluid, but those with osteoarthritis did not. wang, though, says that researchers remain divided about the molecule's importance in the inflammatory process. ?some have shown pro-inflammation, some have shown anti-inflammation.?there is another intriguing side to hydrogen sulphide. in 2005, mark roth at the fred hutchinson cancer research center in seattle, washington, showed that hydrogen sulphide could put mice into a state of suspended animation. their metabolism slowed drastically, and this is how roth explained the deeper-than-deep sleep they were in8. snyder, however, says that this experiment has little bearing on what he has been observing. ?the suspended-animation experiments used doses hundreds of times greater than normally exist and so likely involved mechanisms unrelated to the normal hydrogen sulphide physiology,? he says. ?it's very different to a tiny amount formed by an enzyme.?at the shanghai meeting next month, which some 300 participants are expected to attend, one of the major topics for discussion will be how to translate results in animals into humans ? and, perhaps, who will capitalize first on the gas's therapeutic effects. ?i think that there are drugs to be had here,? says moore. he and wang are collaborating with a company called ctg pharma in milan, italy, where researchers are trying to insert hydrogen-sulphide-donating groups into known drugs, including sildenafil and the painkillers aspirin and diclofenac. researchers at the biotechnology firm ikaria in seattle, washington, are developing therapies based on all three known gasotransmitters. they are testing in phase i trials whether injections of sodium sulphide, an agent that is used to deliver hydrogen sulphide to the body, can treat conditions such as blocked arteries.as such studies move forwards, researchers hope to learn much more about hydrogen sulphide ? and more about gasotransmitters as a whole. moore and wang think that the human body may have the ability to use other simple gases that microbes use, and one example that moore mentions is ammonia ? another gas known for its pungent, rather than physiological, properties. this mean that wang may be able to follow his nose to the next gasotransmitter, just as he did to the last. ?if we learn anything from nitric oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulphide that would be these three gases are not alone,? he says. ?there must be more.?this is a test to see if these entitys work γ α β δ ë κ ó π and the old style α and βzhao, w., zhang, j., lu, y. & wang, r. embo j. 20, 6008–6016 (2001).pubmed central google scholar palmer, r. m. j., ferrige, a. g. & moncada, s. nature 327, 524–526 (1987).article google scholar bredt, d. s. & snyder, s. h. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 87, 682–685 (1990).article google scholar yang, g. et al. science 322, 587–590 (2008).article google scholar mustafa, a. k., gadalla, m. m. & snyder, s. h. sci. signal. 2, re2 (2009).pubmed pubmed central google scholar d'emmanuele di villa bianca, r. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 106, 4513–4518 (2009).article google scholar li, l. et al. circulation 117, 2351–2360 (2008). google scholar blackstone, e., morrison, m. & roth, m. b. science 308, 518 (2005).cas article google scholar download referencesyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarkatharine sanderson is a reporter for nature in london.reprints and permissionssanderson, k. emissions control do not touch. nature 459, 500–502 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1038/459500adownload citationpublished: 27 may 2009issue date: 28 may 2009doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/459500aanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 