new york university is trying to establish a world-class archaeological institute — with funds from a philanthropist who has been linked to looted artefacts. rex dalton reports.you have full access to this article via your institution.unearthed last summer at an ancient crossroads in central asia, two bronze lamps hark back to the greek myth of the golden fleece. they come from the region once known as colchis, in present-day georgia, where jason and the argonauts are said to have searched for the precious wool1. the lamps also reflect the multitude of cultures that passed through the region — with an unusual intermingling of elephants, a woman's snake-wrapped torso and gods decorating their sides.the lamps, which date from between the third and first century bc, are now bringing their story to the united states, where they and other stunning georgian antiquities will form the inaugural show at the newly opened $220-million institute for the study of the ancient world at new york university (nyu). the 130 artefacts include gold jewellery, bronze masks, sculptures and wine goblets, all dating from the last few centuries bc.but while the public admires the artefacts in the institute's gallery, many in the archaeology community are still sputtering over its financial creator — shelby white, a wealthy new york connoisseur whose name has been linked with looted antiquities. last month, she returned nine major artefacts to italy, from where they were looted decades ago; a greek vessel will also be returned in 2010. white has insisted that she had no knowledge of their illicit route to her world-class collection.the worldwide market for antiquities, which collectors such as white underpin, thrives on unprovenanced historical artefacts, sold to collectors as drawing-room 'art' or donated to museums as tax write-offs. objects that move from the archaeological dig to the auction house are often lost to scientific study. some observers even argue that, by raising demand for such antiquities, collectors are the real looters2.  objects and objections  white is one of the most high-profile private collectors, as she regularly lends her artefacts to museums for display. that visibility has drawn extra scrutiny of her collecting habits. she is an unrepentant collector, whose approach to the past i believe is misguided, says colin renfrew, a british archaeologist and former director of the mcdonald institute for archaeological research at the university of cambridge, uk. i look at anything she funds with suspicion.by chance, renfrew will lecture next week at nyu's main campus in greenwich village, where some senior members of the university's anthropology department are similarly sceptical. randall white, an nyu anthropologist who studies palaeolithic cave art and is no relation to shelby white, notes that the new institute was created without the involvement of the anthropology department, one of the top dozen in the nation. he resigned in protest from nyu's center for ancient studies after university authorities accepted the $200-million endowment from shelby white's foundation two years ago. in his resignation letter, he wrote that nyu's acceptance of such support tells the world we condone the collection of unprovenanced antiquities that may have been clandestinely exported from their country of origin.others at the university are also distancing themselves. the institute is built more around the interests of shelby white, says fred myers, chair of the anthropology department. we weren't involved in its development. privately, a prominent department member voiced concerns that an affiliation with the institute might taint a career: if we wanted to work anywhere in the world, we couldn't be associated with the institute.nyu spokesman john beckman says that such an assessment overstates the campus rift. there was wide consultation among the faculty about the establishment of the institute, he says. the response was generally, but not universally, favourable.despite — or perhaps because of — the doubts in the community, the institute has set about establishing itself as an academic powerhouse in new york's posh upper east side. housed in a six-storey limestone town house built a century ago, the institute has offices for five initial faculty members, space for future analytical facilities, a conference centre and a library headed by a specialist from the american school of classical studies at athens in greece. a new doctoral programme is planned, hopefully to start in 2009. for its first faculty hire, the institute's search committee, which included shelby white, recruited roger bagnall from columbia university in new york as director. an authority on ancient texts, bagnall is widely respected for his scholarship and professionalism.the institute is very exciting because it isn't centred around an individual idea or culture. alexander jones last year, he created an advisory panel of half-a-dozen international authorities to begin hiring; it recruited alexander jones, a historian of mathematics and astronomy who came from the university of toronto in canada. jones, who will start as a fully tenured nyu professor in july, says he was attracted by the centre's cross-cultural nature. the institute is very exciting because it isn't centred around an individual idea or culture, like many university departments, he says.we wanted to create a place where different cultures could be studied to appreciate their interdependence, affirms shelby white, whose former personal curator, archaeologist jennifer chi, is an associate director at the centre. that's the underlying uniqueness of the institute.  looking back  for now, the institute's research mission has yet to be defined, beyond the general outline that it will focus on the time period from about 3000 bc to ad 1000. archaeology and history will be our core, says bagnall.as the institute takes shape, white's shadow is ever-present. she is well-known in collection circles for her work with her financier husband, leon levy, who died in 2003. they regularly lent parts of their private collection of antiquities to major museums, including the metropolitan museum of art (the met), just blocks away from the new nyu institute. yet they have also received some of the most public criticism questioning the provenance of their artefacts.white herself has drawn fire for more than a decade. in 2000, president bill clinton nominated her to sit on a panel meant to fight the trade in illegal artefacts, a decision that triggeredan outcry from many archaeologists. the then-president of the archaeological institute of america, nancy wilkie, wrote that white's collecting practices certainly would not meet with the public's approval. white's nomination eventually died when president george w. bush took office and dropped all of clinton's nominees for such appointments.in recent decades the archaeological community has fought back against looting, helping to craft new legislation to block trade in antiquities, launching international investigations, and even helping to close down some artefact auctions in london. oscar muscarella, an archaeologist at the met who speaks out regularly on artefact provenance, says white and her husband seemed to live in the past, when collecting was seen more of an art initiative and less of a force that drives illicit looting. muscarella recalls his last talk with levy. i liked him as a person, he says. he wanted me to be his curator. but i read him the riot act on all the plundered stuff. he smiled, we shook hands and never spoke again.today, shelby white remains active at the met, where she is a benefactor and sits on the search committee to replace recently resigned director philippe de montebello. renfrew, for one, says it is amazing that any museum would continue contact with anyone linked to questionable artefacts. instead of asking themselves how their policies could be so inadequate, he says, the met and some other museums are in denial.coincidentally, similar issues have arisen recently in california, where last month 200 federal agents raided four major museums, including the los angeles county museum of art, as part of a criminal investigation into smuggling and alleged tax-donation violations involving artefacts from southeast asia and native american lands. a financier's private museum outside chicago was also raided. during the five-year probe, undercover agents tape-recorded a network of buyers, gallery owners and museum curators engaged in alleged scams — including purchasing smuggled artefacts and donating others to museums for inflated tax write-offs. federal search warrants indicate that some museum officials knew the objects were looted and values falsely inflated.at the nyu institute's inaugural exhibition, the georgian artefacts have a much clearer history. they have mostly come on loan as part of an arrangement worked out by david lordkipanidze, director of the georgian national museum in tbilisi. lordkipanidze, renowned for his discovery4 of early hominin fossils dating back 1.7 million years in dmanisi, georgia, says that he sees the exchanges as a way to advance studies in his homeland. georgian conservators will receive training at the new institute. and in the catalogue for the upcoming show, he pays special tribute to white, writing that her unstinting care for the archaeology of antiquity provides an amazing example of leadership and demonstrates what philanthropy and public–private partnership can do.most of the georgian artefacts were on display at the arthur m. sackler gallery of the smithsonian institution in washington dc until last month; they have been supplemented for the nyu opening with some new finds, including candelabra, incense burners and the bronze lamps adorned with elephants.in the future, academic archaeologists will be watching closely to see how the institute evolves — particularly in terms of what antiquities can be exhibited or accessioned. if artefacts with suspect credentials are showcased, the outcry is likely to be swift and savage. feresin, e. nature 448, 846-847 (2007).ads cas article google scholar watson, p. & todeschini, c. the medici conspiracy (publicaffairs, new york, 2006).wilkie, n. c. archaeology 53 (6), 10 (2000). google scholar lordkipanidze, d. et al. nature 449, 305-310 (2007).ads cas article google scholar download referencesyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholar rex dalton is a us west coast correspondent for nature.  institute for the study of the ancient world  the shelby white'leon levy program for archaeological publications at harvard  looting matters  saving antiquities  lawyers committee for cultural heritage preservation  new york observer piece reprints and permissionsdalton, r. archaeology: facing up to the past. nature 452, 22–23 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1038/452022adownload citationpublished: 05 march 2008issue date: 06 march 2008doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/452022aanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 