with poland about to join the european union, some of its scientists are eager to be part of the international mainstream. but others still cling to eastern-bloc traditions. quirin schiermeier reports.matthias bochtler beams with delight. proudly, the young biophysicist surveys the basement of warsaw's international institute of molecular and cell biology (iimcb). here, behind a large window, is his group's pride and joy: a brand new x-ray protein crystallography facility, worth some half-a-million euros (us$500,000). glancing at a computer monitor, bochtler nods contentedly — the first data look promising.in warsaw, bochtler is a something of a scientific celebrity. a former phd student of the german biochemist and nobel laureate robert huber, bochtler is one of the few foreign researchers pursuing a career in poland. and he is emblematic of the changes that leading polish researchers say will be necessary if the country is to reap the scientific benefits of its deepening integration with the west.poland is the largest of ten countries that will join the european union (eu) in 2004, and its scientists are already eligible to participate in eu-funded research. making the most of these opportunities will require the country's scientists to adapt to the harshly competitive nature of international science. but in a scientific community dominated by a generation trained during the isolation of communist rule and martial law, that won't be easy.the iimcb, established in 1997, is a focused effort to put the élite of polish biology on an international stage. from the beginning, the idea here was to create something really new; an institute modelled along the lines of the us national institutes of health, with a scientific environment open to international competition, says neurobiologist jacek kuźnicki, the iimcb's energetic director.attracting high-flying scientists such as bochtler was central to the plan. independent, talented lab leaders — from home and abroad — will be crucial to the development of polish science, says kuźnicki. with this in mind, the iimcb's group heads are selected in open competition by an international advisory board. similarly important, argues kuźnicki, is the institute's system of fixed-term contracts and stringent evaluations — a radical departure from the job-for-life atmosphere that still pervades most of the 80 or so institutes run by the polish academy of sciences.our continued existence is fully dependent on our scientific success, says maciej żylicz, head of the iimcb's molecular biology department, whose publications on the role of heat-shock proteins in tumour cells have made him one of poland's mostly highly cited biologists. i accept that, as a scientist, i am asked to constantly prove that i am good, he says. this is, however, an unusual thought in poland, where you are tenured almost as soon as you have received your phd.the iimcb's formula seems to be working. not only is the institute seen as a model by poland's state committee for scientific research (kbn), competing successfully to win a generous portion of the country's meagre science budget, it is also attracting grant funding from foreign sources. and for bochtler, whose work is backed by germany's max planck society, the iimcb represents an appealing scientific home. i am working on an island of plenty here, he says. sometimes, i really think it is unfair that most polish colleagues must get by with much less. but there is so much friendliness here, so much talent and hard work, and no envy at all. cautious approach away from the iimcb, however, things look much less rosy — and some of the initial reactions to its establishment did have the green tinges of jealousy. there was huge opposition among polish professors, recalls kuźnicki. the academy of sciences in particular was extremely sceptical about the principles of external quality control and rolling tenure. kuźnicki attributes this opposition to a fear among the academy's hierarchy of losing power and influence. but some researchers argue that there are good reasons to be cautious about applying foreign recipes to polish science.włodzimierz zagórski-ostoja, director of the academy of sciences' institute of biochemistry and biophysics in warsaw, agrees that the academy needs new blood — and at his own institute he has created a polish–french center for plant biotechnology to support the exchange of young scientists. but he believes that poland is not yet ready for a system based on fixed-term contracts, requiring many scientists to further their careers by moving from lab to lab. unrestricted mobility is not the only prerequisite for good science, zagórski-ostoja argues. it is a feature of our society not to hop around so easily.but other scientists say that polish science must adapt if it is to compete internationally. the main problem is that poland supports institutions, not researchers, and that 90% of polish professors retire at the same institute where they started their career, says leszek kaczmarek, a neurobiologist at the nencki institute of experimental biology, which shares a campus with the iimcb and zagórski-ostoja's institute.in the 1980s, kaczmarek worked in the lab of renato baserga at thomas jefferson university in philadelphia, where he studied the molecular basis of learning and memory. kaczmarek says he is proud that every student who received a phd in his lab has taken up a postdoctoral position abroad. indeed, it is estimated that almost half of poland's young scientists are currently working in the united states.michał kleiber, poland's science minister and head of the kbn, is relaxed about this statistic — his priorities are boosting science funding and reforming poland's science base so that the best of the émigrés eventually return. numerically, our research base is strong enough, but we are still in a period of transition, says kleiber.the supply of young talent clearly isn't a major problem, as student numbers have more than quadrupled since 1990. but the kbn's entire annual budget has shrunk by some 20% since 2000, and now totals just €670 million — roughly equivalent to the annual research spending at a couple of western research universities. a similar amount comes to polish labs from other sources, including the eu. as a proportion of national wealth, poland spends much less than the eu average, and even fails to match eastern european neighbours such as slovenia and the czech republic (see table).kleiber, a physicist and engineer, worked in the united states, germany and japan before becoming director of the academy of science's institute of fundamental technological research in warsaw in 1995. he made what he hopes will be a temporary switch to politics last year, realizing that the future of polish science depends on it being made a higher national priority. it is a tremendous task to convince people here to invest in science rather than worry about tomorrow, kleiber says. uphill struggle but convincing his political peers that investment in research will yield economic returns will be tough — the country's traditional strengths in applied physics, chemistry, mathematics and engineering all lack a domestic industry to absorb their results. poland's weak industrial base is similarly limiting its opportunities in eu-funded research, kleiber admits.but he argues that his fellow ministers are starting to listen. my government colleagues accept the importance of science, not least with regard to eu membership, says kleiber. one positive sign, for instance, is that the kbn will later this year be transformed from a state committee into a fully fledged ministry, giving it more clout within the corridors of power — a change that kleiber hopes will be converted into more coherent science policies and improved funding.so far, however, governmental goodwill has not translated into hard cash. if you subtract obligations to miners, shipbuilders, farmers and so on, there is little left for science, says kleiber. given this background, the kbn is looking for ways to concentrate available funds on the most competitive research units. it has compiled a list of 157 polish labs that have applied for eu funding and were rated as 'good' or better by brussels' peer reviewers.the plan is to prioritize these labs for future funding. but releasing sufficient cash to allow top polish groups to compete on equal terms with western competitors would mean withdrawing government backing from poorly performing labs or institutes. and in this regard, progress is sluggish. jan krzysztof frackowiak, undersecretary of state at the kbn, estimates that only a quarter of the total volume of research carried out at institutes of the academy of sciences is internationally competitive. but currently only one academy institute, for ecology, is earmarked for closure.it's a similar story at the universities. at the 700-year-old jagiellonian university in krakow, the academic cradle of nicolaus copernicus, there are positive signs. last october, it opened poland's first university biotechnology centre, which is already collaborating with prominent western groups and in the autumn will launch english-language courses. but such initiatives are the exception in a system that remains insular and uncompetitive.current employment laws and powerful trade unions restrict the kbn's ability to close academy institutes. and reducing the number of staff in universities isn't an option: they are needed to teach the growing numbers of students.kleiber hopes that once poland joins the eu, its scientific infrastructure will be boosted by money from the eu's structural funds, designed to develop the economy of the union's poorer regions. but in the absence of significant progress in transforming the country's industrial base, winning a sizeable proportion of the separate funds available under the eu's research budget will require poland to raise more of its research centres to the internationally competitive level of the iimcb. and it is difficult to see that happening without widespread closures of labs that are never likely to make the grade.for polish science, the road to successful european integration could be long and rocky.international institute of molecular and cell biology→ http://www.iimcb.gov.plstate committee for scientific research→ http://www.kbn.gov.pl/enpolish academy of sciences→ http://www.pan.pl/englishnature's german correspondent, quirin schiermeieryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarreprints and permissionsschiermeier, q. poles apart, or together with europe?. nature 421, 471–472 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1038/421471adownload citationissue date: 30 january 2003doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/421471aanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative nature (2003)