in choosing an outspoken former government science adviser as its president, the royal society has departed from tradition. peter aldhous spoke to robert may about his plans for britain's national scientific academy.march 1999 was a tough time to be chief scientific adviser to the british government. an intensive campaign by environmentalists to convince the public that genetically modified (gm) crops were unsafe was in full flow. the green lobby provided the ammunition as competing tabloid newspapers rivalled one another in their anti-gm fervour.robert may did not take a low profile. he described the papers' coverage as crap, and was roasted by one editor for treating her readers with contempt. it was, for me, a very steep learning curve, and i made some very instructive errors, may says.the incident did not surprise may's friends. he is never afraid to argue his point, and often does so in colourful language. so when it emerged last year that may would be the next president of the royal society, a few eyebrows were raised. britain's scientific academy is seen as a conservative pillar of the establishment. may, with his blunt manner and high media profile, did not fit the mould. going public in fact, may's appointment is the most obvious move in an ongoing drive by the royal society to engage in public debate. in britain, trust in scientists has been severely damaged by the revelation that bovine spongiform encephalopathy can be transmitted to people, and further dented by the skilfully orchestrated backlash against gm food.in this charged atmosphere, may's experience of working inside government, and the lessons learned from his time in the media spotlight, could be valuable. and no one doubts his scientific credentials. trained in his native australia in theoretical physics, he has brought his formidable mathematical skills to bear on ecology, conservation biology and the dynamics of the struggle between viruses and the immune system — and he still maintains a position at the university of oxford.since taking over at the royal society on 1 december, may has been uncharacteristically quiet. but last week, after chairing his first meeting of its governing council, he was happy to talk about his plans. pitching the royal society into the centre of debate over scientific controversies is top of his agenda. he hopes to build on the society's recent success in briefing members of parliament about stem-cell research in the run up to their vote on allowing embryos to be used to investigate therapies for disease (see nature 409, 5; 2001). meeting of minds another tactic will be to repeat the format of an unusual meeting held last year. the royal society holds regular two-day discussion meetings, which usually attract little attention outside the fields concerned. but last september, the society's london headquarters bristled with television cameras as experts on hiv debated a controversial theory, proposed by the british journalist ed hooper, that aids started in the 1950s through the distribution of a polio vaccine cultured from contaminated chimp tissues (see nature 407, 117; 2000).that meeting happened because of the persistence of its promoter, the late bill hamilton of the university of oxford. hamilton, a leading evolutionary biologist who was sympathetic to hooper's ideas, contracted malaria while in africa seeking evidence to test the theory, and died before the conference took place. some scientists were concerned about the meeting degenerating into a media circus, but it is now recognized to have done much to bring the underlying scientific issues, and the paucity of evidence for hooper's theory, to public attention.some felt there was an air of vulgarity, may says. but i thought it was an example of exactly what the royal society ought to be doing. in future, he wants a couple of slots held open each year to schedule meetings at short notice on matters of public concern. fellow fever if the royal society is to engage with the public more effectively, may argues that it must also be more inclusive. just 42 of its more than 1,000 fellows are women, and those working in non-traditional disciplines are also under-represented. may cites tim berners-lee, who invented the world-wide web while at cern, the european laboratory for particle physics near geneva, as an example. last year, berners-lee was awarded one of the society's prestigious royal medals. but he's not a fellow, because no one had thought to nominate him, may says.to help to ensure that such pioneers do not get overlooked, the society's council has now endorsed a scheme that will no longer require nominees to be proposed by six existing fellows. in future, a proposer and a seconder will do. the scheme was initiated before may's arrival. and he stresses that most of his plans merely represent an extension of the policies of his predecessor, nobel laureate aaron klug of the laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge.but in appointing a high-profile former government adviser, the royal society is intensifying its moves into the public and political arena — and is taking a calculated risk. if you want to be more effective in engaging issues of public concern, then you really need to understand the rules of engagement, says may. but you must always worry that there's a conflict of interest, or that you're bringing baggage from a previous job.may also accepts that some traditionalists feel uneasy about the appointment of someone with his reputation for straight talking. there were those who felt that i'm insufficiently dignified, he says. but, true to form, he is not too worried about causing offence. with respect to the interaction with some people, it will make things easier, he smiles.→ http://www.royalsoc.ac.ukyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarreprints and permissionsaldhous, p. breaking the mould. nature 410, 13 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1038/35065254download citationissue date: 01 march 2001doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/35065254anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 