chemists are working to find alternatives to the noxious organic solvents that currently dominate their industry. as the leading candidates begin to hit the production plant, david adam tests the atmosphere.the chemical industry has an image problem. despite progress in reducing pollution — and the efforts of corporate public-relations departments — belching chimneys, poisoned rivers and the risk of fire or explosions remain at the forefront of many people's minds. and as long as chemical plants continue to rely heavily on toxic and flammable organic solvents, these unsavoury images are unlikely to go away.but techniques that eschew noxious organic solvents for more environmentally friendly alternatives are starting to emerge. leading the way are two unusual materials. one is a hybrid phase of carbon dioxide, known as supercritical co2, which displays properties of both a liquid and a gas. the other is a group of ionic liquids — salts that remain molten at room temperature. ionic liquids have already been successful in a commercial process that is now ready for licensing, and the world's first chemical plants using supercritical carbon dioxide as a reaction solvent should start up next year. green chemistry recently gained its own eponymous journal1. but if this emerging field is really to take off, supercritical co2, ionic liquids and their successors will have to prove more than their environmental credentials — the industry will demand practical benefits and economic viability. environmental benefits alone are never going to persuade people to spend money, says martyn poliakoff of the university of nottingham, a leading figure in the development of chemical processes using supercritical co2. help from a hybrid chemical reactions tend to be faster and easier to control when they take place in liquids because the reacting molecules can mix more readily. but many useful reactants are solids, and so must first be dissolved. water can only dissolve a restricted range of substances, and it was the introduction of a range of organic solvents in the nineteenth century — including hexane and various alcohols — that opened the doors to thousands of new chemical processes. but many organic solvents are toxic and flammable, and usually they are very volatile. in addition, used organic solvents are difficult to recycle.chemists wanting to use different solvents have relatively few choices. enter supercritical co2. normally, when a gas is compressed it turns into a liquid, but above its critical temperature (31.1 °c) gaseous co2 does not. instead, it enters a relatively dense, liquid-like phase that remains highly compressible and mixes easily with other gases. this makes it a very 'responsive' solvent: subtle changes in temperature or pressure can cause different chemicals to pop in and out of solution. reducing the pressure switches the co2 back to being a gas, which is easy to recover and reuse.supercritical co2 is already in wide use for removing caffeine from coffee beans. but chemists admit that it has proved more difficult than expected to develop it as a reaction solvent. in fact, they started working towards that goal in the 1980s. i think we oversold co2 back then, says eric beckman, a chemical engineer at the university of pittsburgh. people thought it would behave just like hexane and could be swapped straight in.in reality, many key reagents do not dissolve readily in supercritical co2. but recent breakthroughs have caused another surge in interest, prompted in part by a technology now being used for dry-cleaning. four years ago, a team led by joe desimone at the university of north carolina at chapel hill discovered that a wider range of useful chemicals can be dissolved in co2 if they are tethered to certain fluorocarbons2. essentially acting as a detergent, these additives help to disperse dyes, catalysts and even water in co2.in february 1999, hangers cleaners, a dry-cleaning firm based in raleigh, north carolina, used this technology in its first co2-based cleaning facility. usually, clothes are dry-cleaned by being tumbled in the organic compound perchloroethylene. but this chemical is classed as an environmental hazard and can damage the nervous system, liver and kidneys. using the fluorocarbon additives, grease and dirt are dissolved so effectively that the cleaning process can be carried out in liquid co2 — it is not even necessary to go supercritical. hangers recently celebrated cleaning its millionth garment and plans to have 70 co2-based outlets by the end of the year.unfortunately, desimone's fluorinated additives are too expensive to make using co2 economic in many industrial processes. but earlier this year, beckman announced that his group had developed cheaper additives that should work in a wide range of situations3. the researchers combined polyether and polycarbonate polymers to create a long-chain copolymer that can smuggle insoluble reagents into co2. the flexibility of the molecule's skeleton and the strong attraction between co2 and the reactive groups on the polycarbonate make the copolymer — and other chemicals attached to it — dissolve more readily.the new additives work better than the fluorocarbon detergents, beckman says, and they are about a hundred times cheaper. several companies have already bought licences for the technology. although much of the ensuing work is cloaked in commercial secrecy, beckman is prepared to reveal that the new additives have led to a cheaper synthesis of hydrogen peroxide. added value another important industrial reaction, hydrogenation — adding hydrogen to an organic molecule — is also being tackled using supercritical co2. hydrogenation is one of the co2-based syntheses that does not need additives — in fact it is hydrogen's high solubility in supercritical co2 compared with organic solvents that makes this route so attractive. the british company thomas swan is investing £2 million (us$2.9 million) in a pilot plant scheduled to open by april 2001 at consett in northeast england. the plant will test a variety of hydrogenation processes using technology developed by poliakoff at nottingham4.poliakoff predicts that hydrogenation will become increasingly important as the chemical industry turns to biological molecules from plant materials, rather than oil, to make organic products. to make chemicals such as plastics from biological feedstock, the oxygen content must first be reduced by adding hydrogen. supercritical fluids improve the yields of these reactions and make it easier to generate the desired products selectively, poliakoff says. in addition, changing the fluid's solvent properties by altering the temperature and pressure allows the reactions to be tweaked to give a different range of products.the chemicals giant dupont, meanwhile, is building a us$40 million development plant in fayetteville, north carolina, that will test the viability of supercritical co2 to produce the fluoropolymers used to make teflon plastics. teflon is usually made using chlorofluorocarbon solvents, but these are being phased out under the montreal protocol and finding suitable replacements has been problematic. the plant should open next spring and, if successful, dupont says it will invest a further us$235 million in the technology. meltdown but supercritical co2 will not be suitable for all chemical processes. many products have commercial values too low to justify the cost of switching plants from organic solvents. and some reactants and catalysts stubbornly refuse to dissolve in co2.so green chemists are developing other options, of which ionic liquids — formerly known as low-temperature molten salts — seem to be the most promising. usually salts are crystalline solids that melt only at high temperatures. their strength lies in the interactions between the ions that make up the salt. because the oppositely charged ions are small and similar in size, the attractive forces between them produce a strong structure that needs a lot of energy to pull it apart. but if this balance is upset by using an excessively large positive ion, the overall structure becomes looser, and the attractive forces within the molecule are weak enough to make the salt a liquid at room temperature.the most common ionic liquids use organic salts such as 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride to provide the large ion. these are combined with inorganic salts such as aluminium(iii) chloride. when mixed together, these two solids produce an ionic liquid. by using different combinations of ions, and adjusting their relative concentrations, it is possible to make up solutions that dissolve a wide variety of substances including plastics, many metals and even some rocks. "for the first time it is possible to design a solvent to optimize a reaction rather than let the solvent dictate the course of the reaction," says ken seddon at queen's university of belfast, northern ireland, one of the leaders in the field.here, too, the infant technology has taken its first steps towards industrial applications. a team at the french petroleum institute (ifp), an independent research centre near paris, now has a commercial process based on ionic liquids ready for licensing5. the process exploits a major advantage of ionic liquids — the fact that they do not mix with many organic liquids. chemists often want to dissolve catalysts but it is difficult and expensive to recover them from solution. but the ifp process uses a chloroaluminate ionic liquid to overcome this problem.the reaction is a variation on the process for producing octene, which is used as a feedstock for making phthalates — additives that soften many plastics. the ifp's conventional process produces around 200,000 tonnes of octene each year using butene as a starting material. but the expensive nickel catalyst needed is used as a solid, and is lost at the end of the reaction, says hélène olivier-bourbigou, who leads the ifp group. in the new process the catalyst is dissolved in the ionic liquid and can be recovered and reused because the resulting octene does not mix with the chloroaluminate liquid.there have been no takers for the new ionic liquid technology yet, olivier-bourbigou admits. but negotiations are continuing. how fast ionic liquids could be introduced depends strongly on demonstrating real advantages for their use and whether they can be dropped in to existing processes, says hans meyer, research director with the pharmaceutical and chemical company solvay deutschland in hannover. olivier-bourbigou argues that the ifp process performs well on both counts. sometimes it's difficult to make changes in our industry, she says. we have demonstrated this technology on a pilot scale and shown that it could be applied to continuous industrial production. positive reaction the ifp process is likely to be the first of several. like teenagers stumbling across a crate of mixed spirits and a cocktail menu, chemists over the past few years have been experimenting eagerly with ionic liquids, ticking off the various reactions that the solvents permit. already, various groups have recast important organic synthesis reactions with ionic liquids in the leading role. in the heck reaction for instance, which links carbon atoms together, the palladium catalyst is usually lost after the reaction. by using an ionic liquid, seddon's group can recycle it6. other recent successes include friedel– crafts reactions7 (often used to make useful compounds from benzene) and the catalytic cracking of polyethylene8, which is an important way of recycling certain plastics. normally, cracking creates a wide range of products, some of which present disposal problems. the ionic liquid process is more selective, generating a greater proportion of useful, low-molecular-weight products such as isobutane.the nuclear industry is also interested: spent fuel could be dissolved in an ionic liquid, its components separated and some of them recycled. and recent results from a team of biochemical engineers led by gary lye at university college london show that ionic liquids could replace toluene as the solvent in the production of antibiotics9.but seddon believes the field is being held back by a lack of fundamental data on the characteristics of ionic liquids, such as their densities and viscosities. it's like being a chemist in the nineteenth century, he says. to help gather that information, and share it among interested companies, seddon and his belfast colleague jim swindall last year established the queen's university ionic liquid laboratories (quill) consortium. its members include industrial giants such as merck, ici and dupont. rather than competing to investigate the potential of ionic liquids, quill members share results and pool any patents. a seat at this round table costs each company £20,000 per year.others may soon have access to similar data. the us national institute of standards and technology plans to extend its existing molten-salts database to include low-temperature ionic liquids. access will be online and free. the quill data might also be released into the database, provided the consortium members give their approval.seddon believes that process engineers will eventually pick and choose ionic liquids or supercritical co2 for different applications. but research into the two leading green solvents is also converging. beckman and fellow chemical engineer joan brennecke at the university of notre dame, indiana, for example, have developed a process that uses supercritical co2 to extract reaction products from ionic liquids10. this could remove the need to find ionic liquids that automatically spit out the product they help make. brennecke's team has already managed to remove naphthalene from an ionic liquid known as [bmim]pf6, and she believes supercritical co2 could be used to scrub clean most industrial ionic liquids. but nobody in the field of green solvents is overselling the technology. thomas swan will know within about a year if its supercritical co2 hydrogenation plant is successful. the company's director and general manager, dai hayward, although optimistic, stresses that the process — like many based on the new solvents — has yet to prove itself economically. if it cannot compete then there will be little room for sentiment. we're willing to lead with our chin on this, he says. but there's only so far we're going to stick it out.leitner, w. nature 407, 295– 296 ( 2000).cas article google scholar mcclain, j. et al. science 274, 2049– 2052 (1996).ads cas article google scholar sarbu,t., styranec, t. & beckman, e. nature 405, 165– 168 (2000).ads cas article google scholar hitzler, m. g. & poliakoff, m. j. chem. soc. chem. commun. 1667– 1669 (1997).olivier-bourbigou, h., chodorge, j. a. & travers, p. petrol. technol. q. 4, 141– 149 (1999). google scholar carmichael, a. et al. org. lett. 1, 997– 1000 (1999).cas article google scholar adams, c., earle, m., roberts, g. & seddon, k. j. chem. soc. chem. commun. 2097– 2098 (1998). google scholar adams, c., earle, m. & seddon, k. green chem. 2, 21– 24 (2000).cas article google scholar cull, s. et al. biotechnol. bioeng. 69, 227– 233 (2000).cas article google scholar blanchard, l., hancu, d., beckman, e. & brennecke, j. nature 399, 28– 29 (1999).ads article google scholar download referencesmember of nature's science writing team, david adamyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarreprints and permissionsadam, d. clean and green. . .but are they mean?. nature 407, 938–940 (2000). https://doi.org/10.1038/35039717download citationissue date: 26 october 2000doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/35039717anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative nature communications (2017)journal of thermal analysis and calorimetry (2014)journal of solid state electrochemistry (2010)applied physics a (2006)