multilayered ferroelectric nboi2 crystals with sub-100-nm thickness exhibit efficient second harmonic generation, paving the way for on-chip nonlinear optical components.you have full access to this article via your institution.nonlinear optical phenomena are usually extremely weak, yet their use in photonics is ubiquitous. most nonlinear optical devices thus require a relatively long interaction length to create a sizeable effect. for example, green laser pointers use a nonlinear crystal a few millimetres thick to double the frequency of an infrared laser. however, these large length scales are restrictive for compact integrated photonic technologies, where devices would ideally measure micrometres or shorter. this demand has led to the exploration of resonant nonlinear materials, which are selected or engineered with optical, electronic and/or vibrational resonances near the operational wavelength to boost nonlinearity (fig. 1). however, resonances come at the cost of limited interaction length due to absorption. thus, resonant nonlinear materials capable of useful nonlinear function over sub-micrometre scales are sought after but remain challenging to realize.a,b, phase-matched shg in a thick nonlinear medium (a) and non-phase-matched shg in a thin nonlinear medium (b). here, a pump of frequency ωp, and momentum |kp| = kp, is doubled in frequency to produce light of wavelength λ with frequency 2ωp and momentum kshg, with component kshg,|| parallel to the pump. c, efficient shg relies on phase matching over the nonlinear medium’s length, l. for a thin nonlinear medium, the beam’s momentum is not conserved, leading to wide-angle and backscattered shg, as shown in b. d, thin-film shg is extremely weak unless tuned to optical resonances or to a material’s electronic or vibrational resonances. resonances may be chosen or engineered at both the pump and shg frequencies, but only provide enhancement over their spectral ranges.now reporting in nature photonics, abdelwahab and co-workers from singapore, germany, brazil, australia and the uk demonstrate1 second harmonic generation (shg) in the 2d ferroelectric material nboi2 with a conversion efficiency >0.2% and an interaction length of just over 20 nm. in doing so, they make progress towards efficient phase-matching-free thin-film nonlinear optics.shg can be remarkably efficient in conventional nonlinear crystals, with well over half of the pump power being converted to the second harmonic. however, this not only requires many millimetres of interaction, but also that the pump and second harmonic beams propagate in perfect phase (fig. 1). achieving phase-matching places technical restrictions on many applications as it usually comes at the cost of reduced tuning range and flexibility. this means that for some photonics applications, it is necessary to migrate to completely new materials that can be integrated with the most relevant photonic platforms, such as polymers2, metamaterials3 and 2d materials4. 2d materials are particularly well-suited for integration as they can now be transferred and stacked onto virtually any substrate.ferroelectrics have broken inversion symmetry, which makes them ideal for second-order nonlinear processes. layered niobium oxide dihalides, nbox2 (x = cl, br, i), feature a peierls-distorted polar structure, which, according to abdelwahab and co-workers’ density functional perturbation theory calculations, leads to large in-plane ferroelectricity and piezoelectric response. given that the shg intensity is proportional to spontaneous polarization, nbox2 are therefore highly promising for exploring large second-order optical nonlinearities.to validate their theoretical prediction, abdelwahab et al. first grow nboi2 by chemical vapour transport, then mechanically exfoliate the bulk crystals onto clean quartz substrates. the obtained flakes are covered with a thin layer of hexagonal boron nitride (h-bn, <10 nm) to avoid photo-oxidation during measurements. flakes are approximately tens of micrometres in size and sub-100-nm in thickness. for optical measurements, femtosecond laser pulses in the range 700–1,500 nm are focussed onto single nboi2 flakes with a ×100 air objective lens, and the shg signal is collected via the same objective. the massive second-order nonlinearity observed in nboi2 occurs in the spectral range 425–525 nm, coinciding with excitons of the 2d layered crystal structure. unlike 2d transition metal di-chalcogenides (tmdcs), which offer similar resonant nonlinearity for odd numbers of layers4, multilayered nboi2 remains non-centrosymmetric, thus enabling nonlinear effects that scale with the material’s thickness.the intrinsic nonlinearity of materials is measured by the nonlinear susceptibility, χ(n), where n indicates the nonlinear order5. shg is governed by the value of χ(2). natural transparent crystals have χ(2) ∼ 1–100 pm v–1. when multiplied by the incident electric field of light, the unitless product gives an indication of the strength of a nonlinear process. for example, the maximum electric field of a relatively low-power ∼1 mw common near-infrared laser focussed to a diffraction-limited spot would be |e| ∼ 1 mv m–1, leading to χ(2)|e| ∼ 10−6–10−4. this is smaller still when phase matching requires a weakly focussed pump beam with a well-defined k-vector. however, strong nonlinear effects occur when χ(2)|e| ∼ 1, thus requiring either more intense light or a more nonlinear material. abdelwahab et al. report χ(2) = 1 nm v–1, which for the example laser field above, gives χ(2)|e| ∼ 10−3. in their experiments, they achieve χ(2)|e| ∼ 1 by using an ultrafast pulsed laser. for reference, to our knowledge, χ(2) = 1.2 μm v–1 is the highest value reported for a metallic metasurface coupled to inter-subband quantum well transitions in the mid-infrared6, also yielding χ(2)|e| ∼ 1. these works show that giant nonlinear interactions are achievable by using a material’s resonant nonlinearity as opposed to the more conventional approach of using the high peak intensity of ultrafast pulsed lasers.another important figure of merit is the shg conversion efficiency. reported efficiencies vary wildly in the literature since shg scales quadratically with the pump intensity, making them sensitive to pump pulse duration and beam focus4. metallic metasurfaces with giant χ(2) in the mid-infrared have achieved 0.075% shg conversion efficiency6, using a quasi-continuous-wave quantum cascade laser (electrically pulsed); however, ultrafast pulsed operation is much more common in thin-film nonlinear optics since high peak intensities boost nonlinear effects substantially and reduce thermal damage. this is the approach taken by abdelwahab and co-workers to achieve >0.2% shg efficiency. care must also be taken when quoting absolute shg conversion efficiencies since they ultimately depend on the pump laser’s peak intensity. it is thus common to quote the shg conversion efficiency in units of %w–1. abdelwahab et al. achieve a shg quantum efficiency of ∼10−4 %w–1, whereas the mid-infrared nonlinear metasurface study6 achieved ∼0.2 %w–1. it is important to note that these metrics are only valid over the measured intensity range and rarely extrapolate to larger efficiencies due to material heating and the onset of damage.besides shg demonstrated here, second-order nonlinearity can be exploited in sum- and difference-frequency generation, which have applications in extending the wavelength range of lasers as well as characterizing laser pulses7. these processes can also extend the wavelength range of single photon sources with conversion to visible8 or telecommunication9,10 wavelengths. for quantum applications requiring correlated or entangled photons, second-order nonlinearity offers another useful process — spontaneous parametric down-conversion (spdc). in spdc a single photon from an input pump beam is annihilated to create a pair of photons. unlike phase-matched photon pair sources, spdc in thin nonlinear materials11 is not restricted in spectral bandwidth or emission direction, making such sources attractive for quantum sensing and imaging12,13, for example. in addition, the spdc process, when pumped strongly or with the introduction of feedback via a resonant cavity, forms the basis for optical parametric oscillators, which can generate bright correlated beams that are inherently squeezed. squeezed light sources have recently been used to perform quantum-enhanced microscopy14,15, which holds promise for applications in biological imaging. highly nonlinear materials such as nboi2 could play a role in quantum applications, providing their inherent spontaneous emission noise can be avoided.the compactness, tunability, high nonlinearity and lack of phase matching in thin nonlinear materials like nboi2 present exciting opportunities for future nonlinear and quantum optics. the next step is to explore how these materials can be integrated with nanoscale and integrated photonics.abdelwahab, i. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01021-y (2022).article google scholar nielsen, m. p., shi, x., dichtl, p., maier, s. a. & oulton, r. f. science 358, 1179–1181 (2017).ads mathscinet article google scholar lee, j. et al. nature 511, 65–69 (2014).ads article google scholar autere, a. et al. adv. mater. 30, e1705963 (2018).article google scholar boyd, r.w. nonlinear optics (academic press, 2008).lee, j. et al. adv. opt. mater. 4, 664–670 (2016).article google scholar gennaro, s. d., li, y., maier, s. a. & oulton, r. f. acs photonics 5, 3166–3171 (2018).article google scholar rakher, m. t., ma, l., slattery, o., tang, x. & srinivasan, k. nat. photon. 4, 786–791 (2010).ads article google scholar zaske, s. et al. phys. rev. lett. 109, 147404 (2012).ads article google scholar morrison, c. l. et al. appl. phys. lett. 118, 174003 (2021).ads article google scholar santiago-cruz, t., sultanov, v., zhang, h., krivitsky, l. a. & chekhova, m. v. opt. lett. 46, 653–656 (2021).ads article google scholar lemos, g. b. et al. nature 512, 409–412 (2014).ads article google scholar brida, g., genovese, m. & berchera, i. r. nat. photon. 4, 227–230 (2010).ads article google scholar triginer garces, g. et al. appl. phys. lett. 117, 024002 (2020).ads article google scholar casacio, c. a. et al. nature 594, 201–206 (2021).ads article google scholar download referencesblackett laboratory, imperial college london, london, ukrupert f. oulton, jefferson flórez & alex s. clarkquantum engineering technology labs, university of bristol, bristol, ukalex s. clarkyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to rupert f. oulton.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsoulton, r.f., flórez, j. & clark, a.s. ferroelectric nanosheets boost nonlinearity. nat. photon. 16, 611–612 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01065-0download citationpublished: 26 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01065-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 