a new method enables precise control of spin qubits in diamond by selectively activating them with a laser beam, thus paving the way to the control of spin qubits in dense arrays for applications in quantum technology.you have full access to this article via your institution.optically addressable spins in solids provide a promising qubit platform for quantum networks, quantum computations and quantum simulations1,2,3. a particularly fruitful approach relies on the use of individual atomic defects in wide-bandgap semiconductors, such as diamond, silicon, or silicon-carbide1. such defects provide an electronic spin that can be detected, prepared, and measured using lasers and fluorescence. these electronic spins are excellent long-lived qubits with coherence times up to seconds and can be precisely manipulated using microwave pulses4.larger systems can be formed by directly coupling defects through magnetic interactions over small distances (typically 20 nm) (ref. 5) or they can be connected through long-range photon-mediated links. the latter has been achieved over distances exceeding a kilometre and makes it possible to develop quantum networks2. additionally, the electron spin can be used to control nuclear spins in the surrounding solid, providing more qubits. in this way, small quantum processors with up to 10 qubits have been demonstrated3,6. for useful quantum computational tasks, many qubits are required to be integrated in chip-scale devices and be individually addressable. however, it is challenging to selectively control qubits in dense arrays without introducing unwanted crosstalk. the microwave pulses that are traditionally used to control spins have long wavelengths (order of 10 cm) and are difficult to focus into small volumes. selectivity in frequency requires strong local magnetic field gradients to shift the spin frequencies, which is challenging to realize. a possible solution is to use laser light that can be focussed down to hundreds of nanometres to directly manipulate the spins7, but resulting control fidelities are typically lower compared to microwave control.now, writing in nature photonics, sekiguchi and colleagues8 present a hybrid approach that combines the best of two worlds. they use a focussed laser beam to selectively shift the frequency of a specific spin transition, so that only a laser-illuminated qubit becomes ‘activated’ to a global microwave control pulse (see fig. 1). when the qubit is illuminated by the laser, the microwave pulse performs the desired control operation, otherwise nothing happens.the beam (in red) is used to shift the energy levels of one of the spins (purple spheres). a global microwave field (in blue), which interacts with all the spins, is used to perform quantum gate operations. the microwave (mv) pulse is chosen in such a way that the laser-activated spin undergoes the desired evolution, while all other spins are unaffected.the authors demonstrate the concept with a nitrogen vacancy (nv) defect in diamond, which consists of a substitutional nitrogen atom next to a vacancy (a missing carbon atom) and is one of the most studied spin defects for quantum technologies. the nv centre ground state forms a spin-1 system, meaning that there are three spin states available. the authors use two of these states to define their qubit. the qubit is then manipulated by microwave pulses that are (near-) resonant with transitions to the third state. by driving the spin to the third state and back, the qubit state picks up a controlled phase. such quantum gates are sometimes called geometric or holonomic gates. the key idea for the optical activation of the gate is that the energy of the third state can be shifted by laser illumination, through the so-called stark shift. as a result, the microwave pulse is either on resonance or detuned depending on whether the laser is on or off, so that the phase picked up by the qubit depends on the laser illumination. importantly, the laser does not affect the qubit states directly, as it only shifts the energy of the third auxiliary state.by combining pulses with carefully tuned frequencies, amplitudes and durations (total duration ~500 ns), the authors construct a universal gate set. the parameters are tuned so that the net evolution for an un-illuminated qubit is the identity operator; without the laser nothing happens. the authors thus realize complete and selective quantum control over the qubit. interestingly, the design of the gates makes them robust against certain types of errors, such as overrotations of the qubit due to varying microwave field strengths. while the gate fidelities demonstrated (between 90% and 97% for different operations) still fall short of what will ultimately be needed for large-scale quantum information processing (typically larger than 99%)9, there are several avenues for future improvement. the hybrid approach of using laser-activated microwave control already shows clear advantages over all-optical quantum gates.sekiguchi and colleagues also extend their control techniques to include the nitrogen-14 nuclear spin that is intrinsic to the nv centre. in particular, they demonstrate the creation of an entangled state of the nv electron spin and the 14n nuclear spin. this result is significant because, besides providing an additional qubit, it also allows to exploit the extremely long coherence times of nuclear spins, which can exceed minutes6. such long-lived qubits can fulfil the role of quantum memories to store quantum states in quantum networks and quantum computations.looking ahead, the new laser-activated quantum gates could directly improve selective control in arrays of defects with spacings on the order of the diffraction limit for the laser light (~200 nm; fig. 1). a more challenging scenario, however, is presented by arrays with a pitch that is small enough to create a direct magnetic interaction between the spins (spacings of ~20 nm). such dense arrays might be fabricated though ion-beam implantation with a high spatial precision in combination with high conversion factors of the implanted ions into the desired defects10. the direct 2-qubit gates between the spins5 make such arrays promising systems for quantum simulations, quantum computation, and quantum sensing. the large-scale control of individual spins in arrays of hundreds, if not thousands, of coupled spins is a fascinating outstanding challenge.sekiguchi and colleagues hypothesize that their concepts can be combined with structured light beams to selectively control multiple qubits even with such strong couplings and small spacings. the ultimate solution for large arrays is likely to involve a combination of structured optical illumination with tailored magnetic field gradients and local electric fields, as well as spatially selective electrical detection methods11. for now, it is clear that the novel quantum control methods by sekiguchi and his colleagues provide an exciting step forward and new opportunities for quantum technologies based on optically addressable spin qubits.awschalom, d. d. et al. nat. photon. 12, 516–527 (2018).ads article google scholar hensen, b. et al. nature 526, 682–686 (2015).ads article google scholar abobeih, m. h. et al. nature 606, 884–889 (2022).ads article google scholar abobeih, m. h. et al. nat. commun. 9, 2552 (2018).ads article google scholar dolde, f. et al. nat. phys. 9, 139–143 (2013).article google scholar bradley, c. e. et al. phys. rev. x. 9, 031045 (2019). google scholar bassett, l. c. et al. science 345, 1333–1337 (2014).ads article google scholar sekiguchi, y. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01038-3 (2022).nickerson, n. h. et al. nat. commun. 4, 1756 (2013).ads article google scholar luhmann, t. et al. nat. commun. 10, 4956 (2019).ads article google scholar siyushev, p. et al. science 363, 728–731 (2019).ads article google scholar download referencesqutech, delft university of technology, delft, the netherlandstim hugo taminiaukavli institute of nanoscience, delft university of technology, delft, the netherlandstim hugo taminiauyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to tim hugo taminiau.the author declares no competing interestsreprints and permissionstaminiau, t.h. quantum gates activated with laser precision. nat. photon. 16, 617–618 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01066-zdownload citationpublished: 26 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01066-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 