an alcohol-functionalized cyclophane has been shown to form a bowl-shaped cavity large enough to host tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(ii). the macrocycle captures, and suppresses the activity of, the ruthenium complex in water but, when oxidized to its ketone-bearing counterpart, releases the ruthenium guest.you have full access to this article via your institution.host–guest chemistry is a fundamental pillar of supramolecular chemistry. it underlies the selective recognition and binding, but also the release, of substrates by molecular receptors — the latter being crucial in areas such as separation sciences1 and catalysis, and for reactions carried out within nanoconfinements2. thus, it is very important to be able to exert some external control over uptake and release events3. in this respect, receptors based on molecular switches4,5 are attractive because they benefit from controllable property changes that can enable the selective binding and release of guest molecules upon exposure to an external stimulus1,3,6.a current issue is that hosts which are able to encapsulate large molecules — such as nanosized coordination compounds — are scarce7. in addition, shape-switchable confinements, which use host–guest complementarity for binding and the lack of it for guest release, often rely on photoresponsive groups that are easily grafted onto the hosts3,6, such as the widely applied azobenzenes1,8. those, however, often show non-ideal switching fidelities and can thus result in undesirable mixtures of possible host species. now, writing in the journal of the american chemical society, a. prasanna de silva and co-workers have tackled this bottleneck through highly efficient redox-active shape-switchable cyclophane receptors9. herein, tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(ii) complexes are in the spotlight as large (>1 nm) iconic target guests, because these complexes are widely used as photoredox catalysts10 and encapsulation is expected to alter both their redox and optical properties.for the receptors, the team used cyclophanes with a shape-switching ability that arises from co units as redox-active centres (fig. 1). in the reduced form, the sp3-hybridized carbon centres of the diaryl-methanol groups allow an orthogonal orientation of the neighbouring phenyl moieties with respect to the macrocycle plane, which gives rise to a bowl-shaped receptor. in the oxidized diaryl-ketone form, on the other hand, π-conjugation between the sp2-hybridized carbonyl groups and the adjacent phenyl rings results in a planar arrangement and an overall flat structure. the investigated cyclophanes are decorated with either one or two carboxylate units per phenylene ring, which will be shown to have a significant influence on the binding behaviour of the diaryl-ketone form. in its reduced form, the oh-bearing cyclophane receptor forms a cavity that encapsulates the large ru(ii) complex. on oxidation, the ar2ch–oh groups are converted into ar2c=o groups and the receptor adopts a flat configuration. when the receptor is functionalized with only one carboxylate group on each phenyl ring, the ru(ii) complex is ‘perched’ atop the flat cyclophane. with an additional carboxylate residue on each ring, no host–guest interaction is observed between the cyclophane (free host) and ru(ii) complex (free guest). the reactivity of the ru(ii) complex is suppressed in the nested binding mode and is partially or totally restored in the perching binding mode or as a free guest in water, respectively.the elegance of the switching process stems from the underlying facile redox reactions that use sodium borohydride as the reductant and potassium permanganate as the oxidizer. the switching between the two forms of the host is very rapid with nearly quantitative (≥95%) switching efficiency, and results in thermodynamically stable states. in contrast, a possible limitation of azobenzene photoswitches is that they feature only one thermodynamically stable state (trans) and thus, relaxation of the metastable cis to the trans state can occur over time.binding of tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(ii) complexes by the cyclophane hosts is driven by a combination of hydrophobic and electrostatic effects as well as by shape complementarity, based on the d3 symmetry-matching of the host and guest.the researchers’ investigations reveal very tight encapsulation of the ru(ii) complex within the nested host–guest structures with astonishing binding constants (log k1:1 = 4.4 to 7.3) for the bowl-shaped form of the studied receptors in aqueous media, which results in significantly altered properties and hindered reactivity. the oxidized, flat version of the receptor shows either a perching binding mode (when the cyclophane is functionalized with only one co2− substituent per phenyl moiety) or no binding at all (with the cyclophane bearing two co2− substituents per phenyl ring). as a result, the ru(ii) complex is either partially or completely exposed to the surrounding media, respectively, more or less restoring its original properties. in situ redox switching of the receptor–guest systems was monitored by luminescence quantum yield for multiple cycles; the fact that the systems showed no signs of decomposition highlights the reliability of the chemical switch.this redox-driven shielding or exposing of the guest’s reactivity was shown to affect applications such as electro- and photocatalysis as well as luminescent sensing. noteworthy are, in this respect, the cyclic voltammetry measurements which show a drastically decreased anodic current (by a factor of 4.6) for the encapsulated ru(ii) complex compared to that of the perching complex. this property change was quantified by the calculation of ‘protection factors’ towards electron transfer from the ru(ii) complex to an electrode. these indeed showed no protection for the guest (protection factor of 0.9) in the case of the perching complex, and a 100 times stronger effect for the nesting complex (with a factor of 93).furthermore, the shielding effect could also be followed by luminescence changes, visible by the naked eye, for a slightly modified ru(ii) complex featuring a ph-sensitive imidazole group as a replacement for one of the six pyridine units. deprotonation of this imidazole nh-unit can occur around ph = 5.5 which results in a non-emissive complex and indeed, no luminescence is observed for the free ru(ii) complex at ph = 7. similarly, a mixture of the ru(ii) complex with the oxidized flat version of the receptor (here featuring two carboxylate substituents) shows no significant luminescence; this is expected because the ru(ii) complexes and cyclophanes do not form host–guest structures. in contrast, a strong guest luminescence is found if the ru(ii) complex is fully encapsulated by the reduced bowl-shaped form, with quenching kicking in only in a more basic environment (ph >9). the observed resistance towards deprotonation is in line with the hypothesis that this receptor state offers protection to the ru(ii) complex and highlights the reactivity change upon shielding or exposing the ru(ii) guests.groundbreaking achievements in the development of synthetic methods using various tris(bipyridine)-based iridium and ruthenium catalysts opened up photoredox catalysis as a whole new research field lately10. the presented study by a. prasanna de silva and co-workers marks a milestone for using shape-switchable receptors as a tool to control the reactivity of tris(bipyridine) complexes. one can easily imagine such a method being used in future investigations to perform consecutive transformations involving different catalysts in a one-pot style. this would involve selectively activating one specific catalyst after another to trigger the corresponding transformations in a chemist’s desired sequence, with different stepwise reactions ideally leading to different products.liu, y. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 143, 3081–3085 (2021).cas article google scholar yoshizawa, m., klosterman, j. k. & fujita, m. angew. chem. int. ed. 48, 3418–3438 (2009).cas article google scholar qu, d.-h., wang, q.-c., zhang, q.-w., ma, x. & tian, h. chem. rev. 115, 7543–7588 (2015).cas article google scholar feringa, b. l. & browne w. r. (eds) molecular switches vol. 1 (wiley-vch, 2011).pianowski z. l. (ed.) molecular photoswitches. vol. 1 & 2 (wiley-vch, 2022).lee, s. & flood, a. h. j. phys. org. chem. 26, 79–86 (2013).cas article google scholar han, m. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 52, 1319–1323 (2013).cas article google scholar jerca, f. a., jerca, v. v. & hoogenboom, r. nat. rev. chem. 6, 51–69 (2022).article google scholar yao, c. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 144, 4977–4988 (2022).cas article google scholar shaw, m. h., twilton, j. & macmillan, d. w. c. j. org. chem. 81, 6898–6926 (2016).cas article google scholar download referencestwitter: @davidvancraendepartment of chemistry and chemical biology, tu dortmund university, dortmund, germanydavid van craenyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to david van craen.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsvan craen, d. pop-up rings to rule reactivity. nat. chem. 14, 971–972 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01033-9download citationpublished: 26 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01033-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 