the hardest barrier in the way to topological control over light with magnetic fields is extremely weak magneto-optic coupling. now, strong light-matter coupling in an optical cavity has been used to reach record energy splitting values for photonic spins in magnetic fields. this is a potential game changer for topological photonics.you have full access to this article via your institution.although photons carry no electric charge, they can interact with static magnetic fields via spin splitting, or the zeeman effect, just like electrons. this circumstance, responsible for the faraday effect among other things, means that optical energy band structures of photonic crystals in magnetic fields can develop topological nontriviality, similar to the quantum hall effect or chern topological insulators1. perhaps the most attractive application of such topological photonic systems could be unidirectional topologically protected edge modes, guiding light in the direction allowed by the magnetic field with no losses due to scattering.despite this idea laying the foundation for the whole new field of topological photonics2,3,4, only artificial magnetic fields in specifically designed photonic structures, replacing actual externally applied ones, first allowed winding photonic energy bands and making them topological5,6. the main reason for that was extremely weak magneto-optical coupling, which limits the width of the topological energy gaps separating spectral bands. such narrow bandgaps are simply blurred by spectral broadening, which suppresses related topological effects. quantitatively, the condition for magneto-induced topological photonics is optical zeeman splitting exceeding spectral linewidths.this threshold was first reached in a structured optical microcavity, where light was strongly coupled to quantum-well excitons, taking the form of a mixed light–matter state, known as exciton–polaritons7. although strong coupling to matter enhanced magneto-optical coupling in this system, it only showed a topological photonic bandgap in quantizing magnetic fields of 5 t magnitude, which evidently limits practical applications.now writing in nature photonics, lyons et al., in pursuit of further magnifying the zeeman effect for light, used a new approach and strongly coupled a photonic cavity mode to charged excitations of an electron gas in a two-dimensional semiconductor8. polarizing electron spins with a static magnetic field, they managed to selectively couple only one specific photonic spin state to matter and thus reach huge effective zeeman splitting values for light8.the authors employed a new-generation material platform: a monoatomic mose2 layer. being a two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenide semiconductor, it couples exceptionally well to light with its excitons: hydrogen-like electron–hole complexes. when placed inside an optical microcavity, such 2d crystals were shown to reach strong light–matter coupling even at room temperatures9,10. however, to reach their goal, the group placed the mose2 monolayer on the top of a ferromagnetic eus film. in addition to locally enhancing the magnetic field, direct contact between the two layers injected an extrinsic-free electron gas into the semiconductor. this made charged trions, similar to three-particle hydrogen ions rather than to atoms, dominantly coupled to light excitation.this layered sandwich was then placed inside the key element of the experimental setup: a tuneable open optical cavity formed by two dielectric distributed bragg reflectors, schematically shown in fig. 1. in combination with precise control over the relative position of these two reflectors, this cavity provided fine tuneability of optical fabry–pérot-type resonator modes. extremely squeezed photonic resonator modes, on the one hand, and two-dimensional matter excitations on the other, allow spatially overlapping the two to such a degree that they form mixed light–matter polariton modes. tuning the optical mode into resonance with excitons or with trions one may obtain either exciton–polaritons or trion–polaritons.the microcavity photon modes are strongly coupled to trion excitations of a two-dimensional electron gas (2deg) in the monolayer semiconductor and form trion–polaritons (shown with red oval). an external static magnetic field polarizes the spins of free electrons in the monolayer and modifies mode coupling, producing giant effective zeeman splitting.in the case of exciton–polaritons, the external magnetic field directly splits spin states in energy due to electron and hole zeeman splitting, which still significantly amplifies magneto-optical sensitivity compared to the case of weak coupling to matter. it is a completely different story with trion–polaritons: here the strong coupling itself becomes spin-selective in magnetic fields. the latter align the extrinsically injected electron gas spins and thus redistribute light–matter coupling strength between the two cavity photon spin states. in the limiting case, where the electron gas is fully spin-polarized, one of the two optical spin states is completely decoupled from trions according to spin selection rules. thus, the energy of the uncoupled spin state remains that of the cavity mode, while the other photon spin component is even further shifted in energy by strong coupling.the above mechanism of magneto-optical coupling, mediated with strong coupling, is different from the conventional one: for instance, it is nonlinear and saturates as the electron gas reaches full spin polarization. however, detecting trion–polariton spectral peaks in polarization-resolved photoluminescence and varying magnetic field strength in the range from 0 to 8 t, the authors measured spin splitting linearly increasing up to roughly 10 mev. thus, in a wide range of magnetic field strength this effect exhibits effective landé g-factor values of approximately 20 and is rightfully referred to as giant effective zeeman splitting.another peculiar side effect of the addressed phenomenon is spin selective optical nonlinearity in trion–polariton density. it has been discovered that non-resonant optical pumping of trion–polaritons partly negates the effect of magnetic field on their energies. this effect was attributed to extremely fast dyakonov–perel-type valley and spin relaxation mechanism depolarizing exciton and trion spins in transition metal dichalcogenides. as trion–polaritons inherit fast spin depolarization from their trion side, when pumped in large numbers, they depolarize the free electron gas by staying in dynamical equilibrium with it and thus counter the spin polarizing effect of the magnetic field. amazingly, the strength of the discovered spin-selective nonlinearity was also found to significantly exceed that of conventional exciton–exciton coulomb interaction and phase-space filling mechanisms.the discovered mechanism of enhanced magneto-optical coupling is far from being a mere incremental step. unlike conventional zeeman splitting, it scales with the strength of light–matter coupling, which may be further enhanced using existing techniques, such as placing more optically active layers in the cavity mode antinodes. even readily reached record spin-splitting values significantly overcome the spectral linewidth threshold and make this system the most prominent candidate for magnetic field controlled topological photonics. at the same time, the simultaneously discovered spin-selective optical nonlinearity mechanism further amplifies the most notorious feature brought to the table by strongly coupled light–matter systems. this combination opens new perspectives for polariton-based nonlinear topological photonics.haldane, f. d. m. & raghu, s. phys. rev. lett. 100, 013904 (2008).ads article google scholar lu, l., joannopoulos, j. & soljačić, m. nat. photon. 8, 821–829 (2014).ads article google scholar khanikaev, a. b. & shvets, g. nat. photon. 11, 763–773 (2017).ads article google scholar ozawa, t. et al. rev. mod. phys. 91, 015006 (2019).ads article google scholar hafezi, m. et al. nat. photon. 7, 1001–1005 (2013).ads article google scholar rechtsman, m. et al. nature 496, 196–200 (2013).ads article google scholar klembt, s. et al. nature 562, 552–556 (2018).ads article google scholar lyons, t. p. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01025-8 (2022).article google scholar dufferwiel, s. et al. nat. commun. 6, 8579 (2015).ads article google scholar lundt, n. et al. nat. commun. 7, 13328 (2016).ads article google scholar download referencesuniversity of wolverhampton, wolverhampton, ukanton nalitovyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to anton nalitov.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsnalitov, a. polaritons elevate magneto-optic effect. nat. photon. 16, 613–614 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01052-5download citationpublished: 26 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01052-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 