the net effect of type i interferon (ifn-i) signaling on tumor control depends on various factors, including the potential engagement of adaptive anticancer immunity. new findings delineate a targetable epigenetic mechanism by which suboptimal ifn-i signaling promotes tumor progression in the context of cancer stem cell expansion and immunoevasion.you have full access to this article via your institution.type 1 interferon (ifn-i) consists of a family of immunostimulatory cytokines that are required for optimal antiviral responses1, as well as for the immunogenic perception of cancer cell death2. in this issue of nature immunology, musella et al.3 describe a setting in which ifn-i signaling elicited by immunogenic cell death (icd) fails to drive therapeutically relevant anticancer immunity and instead promotes tumor progression via the expansion of a cancer stem cell (csc) population with immunoevasive properties.blocking ifn-i secretion by malignant cells undergoing icd as well as blocking ifn-i signaling in both malignant and non-malignant components of the tumor microenvironment has previously been associated with incomplete disease control in a variety of preclinical cancer models2,4,5. however, intratumoral ifn-i levels, as well as genetic signatures of intratumoral ifn-i signaling, have also been linked to poor disease outcomes in several patient cohorts6,7, pointing to a detrimental, rather than a beneficial, effect. this apparent discrepancy has been attributed to the diametrically opposed outcome of acute, intense and resolving ifn-i signaling (which promotes therapeutically relevant cancer-specific immune responses culminating with disease control) versus chronic, indolent and non-resolving ifn-i signaling (which favors the establishment of tumor-promoting inflammation along with t cell exhaustion)8,9. musella et al.3 now demonstrate that suboptimal ifn-i signaling is also linked to the detrimental expansion of cscs, a subpopulation of cancer cells endowed with high tumorigenic, metastatic, immunoevasive and chemoresistant potential that is often viewed as responsible for resistance to treatment and tumor progression.musella et al.3 tested the ability of ifn-i to induce expression of csc markers (mainly cd133 and cd44) by a panel of mouse and human cell lines of epithelial and mesenchymal origin. they found a 2.5–10-fold increase in the fraction of cells with stem-like features across most cell lines investigated, with the exception of non-tumorigenic mcf-10a human mammary cells (presumably because of their non-tumorigenic nature) and highly csc-enriched hmler human breast cancer cells (because they are highly enriched in cscs at baseline). isolation of csc-like (cd133+) and non-csc-like (cd133−) mouse fibrosarcoma mca205 cells followed by exposure to ifn-i resulted in upregulation of surface and intracellular csc markers in both subsets, revealing that ifn-i also promotes stemness features in csc-like cells. these findings were validated by a variety of morphological, phenotypical and functional assays. notably, repeated administration of ifn-i (7 injections of 2 × 104 u each delivered over the entire course of the experiment) was inferior to a single ifn-i dose of 105 u (delivered at the beginning of the experiment) in promoting csc accumulation within subcutaneous mca205 fibrosarcomas in immunocompetent mice, reinforcing the notion that the net outcome in the tumor microenvironment depends on the intensity and duration of ifn-i signaling.next, the authors obtained a panel of mca205 clones that lacked important nucleic acid sensors and signal transducers leading to ifn-i secretion during icd10,11 and cultured the cells in the presence of oxaliplatin (a chemotherapeutic agent with prominent icd-inducing effects). in line with the ability of oxaliplatin to drive ifn-i secretion by cancer cells, control mca205 cells exhibited an accumulation of csc-like cells after oxaliplatin treatment. this effect was fully abrogated by ifnar1 deletion (proving dependency on ifn-i signaling), and partially impaired after deletion of sting1, tlr3, ticam1, ifih1, and mavs (pointing to an incomplete redundancy among these pathways). similar findings were obtained by checking the mrna levels for a variety of genes involved in stemness (for example, sox2, nanog, myc, and pou5f1 (also known as oct3/4)), by using doxorubicin as an alternative icd inducer, and by using mouse at3 mammary carcinoma cells as a model. finally, subcutaneous mca205 tumors established in syngeneic immunocompetent mice were not enriched in csc-like cells upon treatment with cisplatin (which does not induce icd) and the therapeutic activity of doxorubicin could be boosted by repeated ifn-i administration (7 injections of 2 × 104 u each delivered over the entire course of the experiment), which prevented the accumulation of csc-like cells. these data suggest that inefficient (non-curative) icd induction coupled to limited ifn-i signaling favors the accumulation of csc-like cells that support tumor progression, which can be prevented by repeated administration of ifn-i.co-culture experiments revealed that only benzonase (which degrades all nucleic acids), and not rnase or dnase, can abrogate the capacity of mca205 cells responding to oxaliplatin to elicit csc-like cells in naive mca205 cells, which reflects the involvement of multiple nucleic acid sensors as identified by genetic studies (see above). similar results (although of reduced magnitude) were obtained with at3 cells and mouse ct26 colorectal carcinoma cells. moreover, the accumulation of csc-like cells among naive mca205 cells exposed to their oxaliplatin-treated counterparts was limited by the actin inhibitor cytochalasin d, which — along with fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry studies — pointed to the (at least partial) involvement of extracellular vesicles (evs). intriguingly, these evs were found to contain mrnas encoding factors involved in stemness (for example, sox2, nanog, myc, and pou5f1).subsequent experiments demonstrated that csc-like cells expanding in the context of icd are heterogenous at multiple levels, including sensitivity to treatment, tumorigenic and/or metastatic potential, and capacity to escape immune control. specifically, cd133+cd24+cd44high (but not cd133+cd24+cd44low) csc-like mca205 cells exhibited greater chemoresistance (in vitro and in vivo), tumorigenic/metastatic potential and immunoevasive properties than their parental counterparts. specifically, cd44high csc-like mca205 cells had limited prophylactic activity when used in gold-standard vaccination assays upon in vitro exposure to oxaliplatin, were unable to generate long-term protection against parental cells in the (few) mice that rejected the challenge after successful vaccination, and were more proficient than parental and cd44low csc-like counterparts at generating pulmonary metastases after intravenous injection in immunocompetent (but not immunodeficient) mice. in line with these findings, cd44high csc-like mca205 cells were inferior to parental counterparts at eliciting t cell cross-priming in vitro, correlating with the upregulation of multiple immunosuppressive surface molecules including cd274 (also known as pd-l1) and a reconfiguration of the cytokine secretome toward pro-metastatic (for example, cxcl1 and cxcl2) over immunostimulatory (for example, ccl2 and ccl5) factors. some of these findings were replicated in cd24low csc-like at3 cells.musella et al.3 then used atac-seq (assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing) to investigate the epigenetic alterations underlying the ability of ifn-i to drive stemness. the analysis of loci that were open in cd44high csc-like mca205 cells, but closed in their parental counterparts, identified genes controlling the csc phenotype and behavior, as well as genes encoding immunosuppressive factors, such as granzyme b inhibitors. conversely, loci that were open in parental mca205 cells, but closed in their cd44high csc-like counterparts, included genes involved in antigen presentation. these findings were validated by rna sequencing. globally, the acquisition of stemness traits driven by ifn-i in mca205 cells was accompanied by extensive chromatin remodeling involving various transcription factor-binding motifs, a majority of which had previously been linked to the maintenance of stemness, tissue remodeling, immunoevasion, response to stress, and enhanced chromatin accessibility12.the authors focused on lysine demethylase 1b (kdm1b) as a potential epigenetic driver of these alterations based on its responsiveness to ifn-i and its well-established role in cancer evolution, cellular plasticity, and immune escape12. atac-seq revealed that kdm1b overexpression in parental mca205 cells enables chromatin opening at loci that were associated with ifn-i-driven stemness, while kdm1b depletion favors closing of the same loci. chip–seq (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing) analysis of cd44high csc-like mca205 cells confirmed that kdm1b physically interacts with numerous genes involved in stemness, and inhibition of kdm1b with tranylcypromine (tcp) limited the accumulation of csc-like cells amongst naive mca205 cells exposed to their oxaliplatin-treated counterparts. along similar lines, tcp prevented the expansion of csc-like cells driven by doxorubicin within mca205 lesions established in immunocompetent syngeneic mice, as it improved therapeutic tumor control. consistently, kdm1b-overexpressing mca205 cells exhibited an expanded csc-like compartment at baseline, both in vitro and in vivo, as well as increased chemoresistance and tumorigenic/metastatic potential (in immunocompetent, but not immunodeficient, hosts) as compared to their parental counterparts. these data implicate kdm1b in the capacity of ifn-i to promote stemness in the context of failed immune eradication.of note, kdm1b levels correlated with genetic signatures of stemness in public transcriptomic datasets, including cohorts of cancer patients who normally receive doxorubicin and other anthracyclines as part of their clinical care. in at least some of the cohorts analysed in this respect, stemness signatures also correlated with ifn-i signaling signatures. finally, patients with breast cancer from the metabric cohort experiencing inferior disease-specific survival were enriched for individuals exhibiting high kdm1b levels as well as genetic signatures of stemness and ifn-i signaling. these data confirm and expand on previous findings attributing a negative prognostic role for ifn-i signatures in patients with breast cancer6,7.in summary, musella et al.3 identify a mechanism by which the suboptimal induction of icd initiates a nucleic acid-dependent ifn-i response that fails to drive anticancer immunity and instead activates kdm1b in residual cancer cells to expand cscs and drive tumor progression (fig. 1). these data point to kdm1b as a potential target to ameliorate the efficacy of clinically available icd inducers. specifically, the local administration of kdm1b inhibitors might boost the efficacy of cancer therapy with icd inducers while avoiding any potential toxicity for normal stem cells outside of the tumor.a, in an ideal setting, immunogenic cell death (icd) induced by chemotherapy (or radiation therapy) culminates in the activation of an adaptive tumor-targeting immune response that eradicates residual cancer cells. b, however, multiple factors including an increased degree of intratumoral heterogeneity (ith) as well as defects in damage-associated molecular pattern (damp) emission or sensing might negatively affect the ability of icd to successfully drive tumor eradication. in this latter setting, nucleic acids released by cancer cells succumbing to icd drive a type i interferon (ifn-i) response that activates the epigenetic enzyme lysine demethylase 1b (kdm1b) in residual cells, culminating in the expansion of an immunoevasive population of cancer stem cells (cscs) that drive tumor progression and therapeutic failure. inhibition of kdm1b might prevent such a scenario. dc, dendritic cell; teff, effector t.mcnab, f., mayer-barber, k., sher, a., wack, a. & o’garra, a. nat. rev. immunol. 15, 87–103 (2015).cas article google scholar kroemer, g., galassi, c., zitvogel, l. & galluzzi, l. nat. immunol. 23, 487–500 (2022).cas article google scholar musella, m. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01290-3 (2022).article google scholar sistigu, a. et al. nat. med. 20, 1301–1309 (2014).cas article google scholar yamazaki, t. et al. nat. immunol. 21, 1160–1171 (2020).cas article google scholar rodriguez-ruiz, m. e. et al. oncoimmunology 8, e1655964 (2019).article google scholar weichselbaum, r. r. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 105, 18490–18495 (2008).cas article google scholar palucka, a. k. & coussens, l. m. cell 164, 1233–1247 (2016).cas article google scholar vanpouille-box, c., demaria, s., formenti, s. c. & galluzzi, l. cancer cell 34, 361–378 (2018).cas article google scholar hopfner, k. p. & hornung, v. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 21, 501–521 (2020).cas article google scholar rehwinkel, j. & gack, m. u. nat. rev. immunol. 20, 537–551 (2020).cas article google scholar bayik, d. & lathia, j. d. nat. rev. cancer 21, 526–536 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of radiation oncology, weill cornell medical college, new york, ny, usalorenzo galluzzisandra and edward meyer cancer center, new york, ny, usalorenzo galluzzicaryl and israel englander institute for precision medicine, new york, ny, usalorenzo galluzzicentre de recherche des cordeliers, equipe labellisée par la ligue contre le cancer, université de paris cité, sorbonne université, inserm u1138, institut universitaire de france, paris, franceguido kroemermetabolomics and cell biology platforms, gustave roussy cancer center, université paris saclay, villejuif, franceguido kroemerinstitut du cancer paris carpem, department of biology, aphp, hôpital européen georges pompidou, paris, franceguido kroemeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to lorenzo galluzzi or guido kroemer.l.g. declares having held research contracts with lytix biopharma and promontory, has received consulting/advisory honoraria from boehringer ingelheim, astrazeneca, omniseq, onxeo, the longevity labs, inzen, sotio, promontory, noxopharm, educom, and the luke heller tecpr2 foundation, and holds promontory stock options. g.k. declares having held research contracts with daiichi sankyo, eleor, kaleido, lytix pharma, pharmamar, osasuna therapeutics, samsara therapeutics, sanofi, sotio, tollys, vascage and vasculox/tioma, has received consulting/advisory honoraria from reithera, is on the board of directors of the bristol myers squibb foundation france, is a scientific co-founder of everimmune, osasuna therapeutics, samsara therapeutics and therafast bio, and is the inventor of patents covering therapeutic targeting of aging, cancer, cystic fibrosis and metabolic disorders, including patents licensed to bayer (wo2014020041-a1, wo2014020043-a1), bristol-myers squibb (wo2008057863-a1), osasuna therapeutics (wo2019057742a1), pharmamar (wo2022048775-a1), raptor pharmaceuticals (ep2664326-a1), samsara therapeutics (gb202017553d0 and gb202017030d0), and therafast bio (ep3684471a1).reprints and permissionsgalluzzi, l., kroemer, g. immuno-epigenetic escape of cancer stem cells. nat immunol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01293-0download citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01293-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 