planar josephson junctions with nb electrodes and a composite weak link barrier combining heavy metal pt and ferrimagnetic y3fe5o12 enable a large supercurrent diode effect at 4he fridge temperatures in the absence of an applied magnetic field.you have full access to this article via your institution.the coupling of spin degrees of freedom to electronic transport mediated by spin orbit interaction in systems with broken inversion symmetry underlies exciting topological states observed in very different material families and is the root of spin-orbitronic effects that have boosted the field of spintronics in recent years. as they report in this issue of nature materials, this physical scenario is exploited by kun-rok jeon and collaborators1 to realize an exciting supercurrent rectification effect in planar josephson junctions fabricated with conventional spintronic materials.broken inversion symmetry is present in non-centrosymmetric crystals and at surfaces and interfaces, and causes (rashba-type) momentum-dependent spin splitting of the electronic bands. non-reciprocal transport emerges from the broken inversion symmetry, but typically requires magnetic fields to avoid cancellation from the superposition effect of degenerate kramers pairs. if, in addition to the broken inversion symmetry, the application of an in-plane magnetic field breaks time-reversal symmetry, electrons with opposite momenta become non-equivalent (through the magnetic field effect on their spins), and electronic transport rectification effects occur by which electric resistance becomes dependent on the sense that current is flowing (fig. 1a). diode effects driven by combined inversion and time-reversal symmetry breaking were first observed in semiconductor devices2 and have been recently observed in different quantum materials3 and, interestingly, also in superconductors4 and josephson junctions5, but at very low (∼10–100 mk) temperatures and in the presence of magnetic fields.a, spin–orbit coupling (soc) splits the bands laterally by δkr while the exchange field (zeeman) splits them vertically by δeex, removing the kramers degeneracy. kx and ky stand for in-plane momentum components and ef for the fermi level. b, supercurrent diode effect at 2 k for parallel and antiparallel orientations of the pt magnetization with respect to the x axis. the rectification polarity reverses when the direction of the magnetization of the yig is inverted (what inverts the direction of the exchange field through the induced magnetization in the pt (mpt)). figure reproduced with permission from ref. 1, springer nature ltd.kun-rok jeon and collaborators1 have succeeded in demonstrating a very large superconducting diode effect in josephson nanostructures in the absence of any applied magnetic field. planar junctions combining nb electrodes and composite barriers were fabricated with typical spintronic materials (pt and y3fe5o12 (yig) ferrimagnet) and shown to operate at 4he fridge temperatures. the time-reversal symmetry breaking is elegantly engineered in the pt weak link through magnetic proximity interaction by the bottom ferrimagnetic y-fe garnet. as such, the exchange field induced in the pt is externally switchable and controls the polarity of the diode effect in the absence of an applied magnetic field.the resistance diode effect can be understood as follows. up to first order, non-reciprocal electrical resistance is described as r(b,i) = r0(1 + γez ∙ (b × i)), where r0 denotes the ohmic resistance in zero magnetic field, ez is the unit vector perpendicular to the layer and the (tensor) coefficient γ accounts for the magnetochiral anisotropy correction, that is, the non-reciprocal resistance driven by spin orbit interaction. b and i are, respectively, magnetic field and current vectors. γ, the ratio of the non-reciprocal resistance to the normal resistance, is very small as expected from the spin orbit energy scale being typically much smaller than the fermi energy. in superconductors and josephson junctions, however, the vanishing resistance changes the balance and stronger non-reciprocal effects in transport arise from the competition between spin orbit and superconducting gap characteristic energies5.in josephson junctions, non-reciprocal transport manifests in a supercurrent that is different for opposite polarities of the gauge invariant phase difference (φ). the lift-off of the kramers degeneracy by the broken inversion and time-reversal symmetries yields an anomaly in the current–phase relation (cpr), which departs from the antisymmetric i(φ) = −i(−φ) relation expected from the normal cpr containing only n-harmonics of the form sin(nφ). in practice, this results in an anomalous phase shift φ0 in the cpr (which now contains also cosine terms cos(nφ)), thus yielding different critical currents, ic+ and ic− for positive and negative phase differences, respectively, giving rise to the superconducting diode effect.the work by kun-rok jeon and collaborators1 demonstrates an impressively large difference between critical currents for positive and negative (phase) polarity: ic+ = 180 µa and ic− = 120 µa measured at 2 k in the absence of any applied magnetic field. broken time-reversal symmetry is enabled by the induced exchange field in the pt weak link whose direction can be preconfigured and controlled by the yig remanent magnetic state (fig. 1b). the result is important from various perspectives. fundamentally, it demonstrates a large diode effect in a simple system combining conventional transition metal films, which will probably stimulate theoretical modelling and enable a deeper understanding of the supercurrent rectification effect. at the practical level, it represents a step further towards supercurrent rectifiers based on josephson diodes, which may find interesting applications in superconducting quantum electronic circuits.on the other hand, the work exploits concepts of superconducting electronics at the intersection with spin-orbitronics. an interesting outlook regards the possible implications of the work for superconducting spintronics. it has been shown theoretically that the superconducting proximity interaction on the pt layer with broken inversion symmetry and strong spin–orbit interaction yields pairing amplitudes that are mixtures of singlets and triplets6. now, the exchange field induced by the yig by magnetic proximity may have an effect in a dominating triplet component7 generated below the superconducting electrodes and propagating (long range) along the weak link spacer, as theoretically proposed recently8,9. the spin parity of the pairing amplitude in the weak link remains to be explored, but realizing tunable triplet supercurrent diodes via rashba spin–orbit coupling together with the recently demonstrated long-range josephson effect in planar junctions10 may trace an interesting avenue into future superconducting spin-orbitronics.jeon, k.-r. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01300-7 (2022).article google scholar rikken, g. l. j. a. & wyder, p. phys. rev. lett. 94, 016601 (2005).cas article google scholar tokura, y. & nagaosa, n. nat. commun. 9, 3740 (2018).article google scholar ando, f. et al. nature 584, 373–376 (2020).cas article google scholar baumgartner, c. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 39–44 (2021).article google scholar gor’kov lev, p. & rashba, e. i. phys. rev. lett. 87, 37004 (2001).article google scholar bergeret, f. s. & tokatly, i. v. phys. rev. lett. 110, 117003 (2013).cas article google scholar bujnowski, b., biele, r. & bergeret, f. s. phys. rev. b 100, 224518 (2019).cas article google scholar eskilt, j. r., amundsen, m., banerjee, n. & linder, j. phys. rev. b 100, 224519 (2019).cas article google scholar sanchez-manzano, d. et al. nat. mater. 21, 188–194 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesgfmc, departamento fisica de materiales, facultad de fisica, universidad complutense, madrid, spainjacobo santamariayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jacobo santamaria.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionssantamaria, j. superconducting diodes with no magnetic field. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01338-7download citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01338-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 