epitaxial heterostructures of multi-dimensional halide perovskites are demonstrated by ligand-assisted welding, providing a platform for realizing hybrid systems with unique combined properties.you have full access to this article via your institution.combining materials of different structure, dimensionality and functionality together is routinely done to create new materials and to discover new physicochemical properties. the combination of different elements to realize unique properties that go beyond those of the single constituents is an enduring challenge in materials science. heterostructures are particularly important in solid-state physics, and offer an incredible playground to interface two or more materials of different chemical, structural and crystallographic properties. nowadays, thin-film semiconductor heterostructures are commonly utilized in highly technological impact sectors, ranging from electronic communication to light emission and solar cells (fig. 1a)1. in 2001, herbert kroemer and zhores alferov were awarded the nobel prize in physics for the development of semiconductor heterostructures for high-speed optoelectronics2,3. silicon-based heterojunctions are essential to electronic devices, including solar cells. the silicon heterojunction solar cell owes its record performances to the surface passivation of the crystalline silicon defects by an ultrathin layer of amorphous silicon, forming a well-defined heterostructure (fig. 1b)4,5.a, epitaxial growth of 2d heterostructures and more complex structures. the monolayer seed (1) is transformed into an epitaxial heterostructure (1–2), which can be further enriched to a multi-heterostructure (1–2–3) or to a superlattice (1–2–1–2). b,c, two examples of heterostructure highlighted by cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy: the crystalline silicon (c-si) with the amorphous silicon (a-si) (b) and the perovskite–perovskite heterostructure of zhu et al. (c). scale bars, 5 nm. the red square highlights the heterostructure. d, the cations used to create the 2d perovskite. e–g, the 2d (e) and 3d (f) schematic representations of the epitaxial heterostructure and associated energy and charge-transfer processes at the interfaces (g), as reported by zhu et al. pea, phenethylammonium; pma, phenethylammonium; ba, butylammonium. figure adapted with permission from: a, ref. 1, aaas; b, ref. 5. under a creative commons licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/); c,e–g, ref. 10, springer nature ltd.we have recently witnessed the rising of hybrid halide perovskites, which are considered to be the emerging materials for a new generation of optoelectronic devices6,7. a peculiar characteristic of these perovskites is their facile tunable properties combined with their solution processability8, but they lack atomic-scale control, leading to non-uniform composition, crystal phase and dimensionality. a recently reported three-dimensional (3d)/two-dimensional (2d) perovskite junction8,9 — an example of multiple phases with dissimilar crystal characteristics — lost its crystal coherence upon assembly, and thus the unique interfacial properties.now, writing in nature materials, zhu and colleagues10 report the fabrication of a 3d/2d epitaxial heterostructure by controlling the post-growth-oriented assembly via in situ ligand exchange (fig. 1c–e). the 3d perovskites investigated include cspbx3 (where x is cl, br or i) and the double perovskite cs2agbibr6, and the 2d perovskites consisted of aliphatic and aromatic amines. cspbbr3 nanocubes formed an epitaxial connection with a2pbbr4 platelets (where a is a different aliphatic or aromatic cation such as phenetylammonium, butylammonium, phenemethylammonium and more; fig. 1d) owing to the presence of a similar periodic network of corner-shared [pbbr6]4– octahedra. by comparing the results from a multitude of combinations of 3d/2d perovskites, they found that lattice mismatch itself cannot explain the different assembly behaviours observed. formation of a net dipole at the interface, such as van der waals and dipolar interactions, also fails to explain this. the dielectric functions of the 2d perovskites in the directions parallel to their basal surfaces are almost isotropic, thus eliminating the possibility of dipolar interactions acting as the driving forces to align the 3d perovskites on 2d perovskites. the authors proposed that ligand interaction is the key enabler (fig. 1f), for example, the substitution of oa/ola molecules by peai on the nanocubes, and the subsequent interaction with a2pbbr4 (where oa is oleic acid, ola is oleylamine, and peai is phenethylammonium iodide). the mobile nature of halide ions in perovskites and anion exchange are further responsible for the formation of mixed cspb(brxcl1−x)3/pea2pb(br1−ycly) and cspb(brxi1−x)3/pea2pb(br1−yiy)4 epitaxial heterostructures. importantly, this work demonstrates that room-temperature epitaxial welding can be achieved in multiple perovskite configurations, with perovskites made of different organic ligands and halogen compositions, making it an intrinsic property of such heterointerfaces.such epitaxial heterojunctions pave the way for designing novel interfaces that can be used as platforms to explore new photophysical properties rising from the interface states, which are otherwise averaged out in bulk systems. in this work, new emissive peaks with a shifted spectrum as a result of efficient energy and hole transfer to the capping 2d layer at the interface between the two perovskites (depending on their relative energy-level alignment; fig. 1g) is a good example of this phenomenon. importantly, such new properties only stem from a controlled interface coherence and lattice strain that can accommodate local distortions and thus favours specific photo-excited-state paths, which is absent in the randomly assembled interface.the ability to control the 2d/3d interface and its predictability provide researchers with a means to address the issues pertaining to device stability, such as ion movement, charge accumulation, band bending and charge recombination. it also plays an important role in fabricating smart interfaces where charge or energy tunnelling is important — one can think of charge-extracting layers in solar cells or charge-injection layers in light-emitting devices. passivation is another problem that can be tackled by this strategy. the surface of a perovskite layer (or the ending of the crystals) is a highly defective region where charges are prone to undergo undesirable recombination and contribute to the efficiency loss. epitaxial heterostructures may simultaneously passivate these defects and reduce the surface recombination velocity of the carriers.despite the potential, challenges lay ahead and more work needs to be done before one can realize epitaxial heterojunctions implemented in real device applications. understanding the type (beyond amines) and nature of ligand interaction, and thus the self-assembly and interaction process, is paramount to expand this method for welding more diverse structures together. the importance of lattice mismatch, and the upper limit before epitaxial structure fails to form, also warrants further investigation. furthermore, demonstration of a complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor-compatible method for processing 3d/2d perovskites with silicon-based semiconductor technologies is necessary to ensure seamless integration. nonetheless, the approach proposed by zhu and colleagues could represent a platform for realizing next-generation perovskite-based electronics, resistors, memories and sensors.zhang, z. et al. science 357, 788–792 (2017).cas article google scholar kroemer, h. rev. mod. phys. 73, 783 (2001).cas article google scholar alferov, z. i. rev. mod. phys. 73, 767 (2001).cas article google scholar battaglia, c., cuevas, a. & de wolf, s. energy environ. sci. 9, 1552–1576 (2016).cas article google scholar li, c. et al. int. j. photoenergy 2014, 491475 (2014). google scholar kim, j. y. et al. chem. rev. 120, 7867–7918 (2020).cas article google scholar tan, z.-k. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 9, 687–692 (2014).cas article google scholar grancini, g. & nazeeruddin, m. k. nat. rev. mater. 4, 4–22 (2019).cas article google scholar jariwala, s. et al. chem. mater. 33, 5035–5044 (2021).cas article google scholar zhu, z. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01311-4 (2022).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry and instm, university of pavia, pavia, italymichele de bastiani & giulia granciniyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to giulia grancini.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsde bastiani, m., grancini, g. rising of halide perovskite epitaxial structures. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01331-0download citationpublished: 24 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01331-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 