immune checkpoint inhibitors (icis) are effective for many cancers but can be limited by inflammatory toxicities. little is known about how icis affect the reproductive system. new research in animal models with and without tumours demonstrates that ovarian reserves are depleted in mice treated with icis, which may influence fertility.you have full access to this article via your institution.immune checkpoint inhibitors (icis) have altered the treatment landscape for a diverse range of malignancies, leading to a growing population of patients who have had longstanding durable remission from their cancers1. alongside therapeutic success, icis have led to a variety of inflammatory toxicities, referred to as immune-related adverse events. the most common toxicities from the currently used icis involve the skin, gastrointestinal tract and liver, and thyroid gland2, but they can affect any organ system in the body and are an important cause of both morbidity and mortality1. as the use of these drugs has increased, the range of reported side effects, including neurological and cardiac toxicities, has expanded markedly. although these side effects are rare, they can be fatal3,4. despite ongoing expansive efforts, the long-term effects of inflammation caused by icis are poorly understood, and in particular, very little is known about the reproductive consequences of these medications. in this issue of nature cancer, winship et al.5 report that icis cause ovarian inflammation and diminish oocyte reserves in mouse models, a finding that, if replicated in people, could have substantial implications for the care of patients of reproductive age receiving these treatments, particularly as no reproductive or fertility studies were conducted before fda approval of any of the icis5.icis work by inhibiting regulatory pathways that are essential for maintaining immune homeostasis1. so far, three classes of icis have been approved for clinical use, targeting cytotoxic t lymphocyte antigen-4 (ctla-1), programmed death-1 (pd-1) or its ligand pd-l1, or more recently, lymphocyte activation gene 3 (lag3)1,6. although mice deficient in these genes encoding these proteins develop inflammatory disease, mice treated with antibodies to these checkpoint proteins do not develop toxicities1,2. even inhibition of ctla-4 is well tolerated in mice, despite the fact that genetic deficiency in ctla4 leads to lethal multi-system inflammation in mice, reminiscent of the disease that occurs in people with heterozygous ctla4 deficiency1,2. because of this discrepancy between mice and humans treated with icis, most insights into these toxicities come from mostly observational clinical data and analysing patient samples. substantial work has gone into producing reliable mouse models of ici toxicities, with the goal of testing mechanistic hypotheses, although these efforts have been largely unsuccessful1,2. to address this, winship et al.5 use a mouse model to quantify ovarian reserves in mice undergoing ici treatment, in both the presence and absence of tumours. through morphological assessment of the ovaries they find that ovarian reserves plummet in the setting of treatment with either anti-pd-l1 or anti-ctla-4 monotherapy — with significant reductions in primordial follicles even up to 100 days after treatment — and, in addition to reduced numbers of corpora lutea, indicating impairment of ovulation, disruption in estrous cyclicity (similar to the menstrual cycle in humans) was observed in most but not all ici-treated mice. however, whether these mice have an infertile or subfertile phenotype is unknown, as no formal fertility studies were performed.the authors also explore the mechanism of ovarian toxicity observed in their models, finding robust infiltration of cd8+ effector memory t (tem) cells and resident memory t (trm) cells in the ovaries of mice treated with icis (fig. 1). this finding is in alignment with recent work analysing human ici toxicities that found striking expansion of trms in the colonic mucosa of patients with ici colitis, in which these cells appear to have differentiated into a highly cytotoxic effector population2,7,8. one of the major limitations of previous animal models of ici toxicity is that they have not recapitulated key aspects of toxicity observed in humans. the expanded trm and tem cells, as predicted on the basis of human data, underscore the potential relevance of this mouse model2,5,7.during treatment with icis, trm cells (green) and tem cells (blue) expand. this expansion is associated with increased tnf in the ovary and a reduction in oocytes (pink). loss of oocytes is dependent on adaptive immunity, but the precise mechanisms of oocyte loss remain undetermined.additionally, winship et al.5 demonstrated that mice deficient for all t, b and natural killer cells (rag2/γc deficient) had preserved ovarian reserves after ici treatment, directly implicating t cells in the mechanism of oocyte loss, although the lack of a direct same-experiment wild-type control somewhat limits the findings. whether these t cells are directly killing oocytes or whether the mechanisms are predominately mediated by inflammatory cytokines is unclear. the authors showed robust expression of tnf in the ovaries of ici-treated mice, consistent with a key role for this cytokine in other ici toxicities2. further supporting a role for tnf in oocyte loss, ovarian toxicity appears to be ameliorated in mice deficient in the apoptosis mediator bid, which are resistant to extrinsic apoptotic cell death, including that triggered by tnf; however, the effects of tnf blockade or deficiency were not assessed, nor was perforin-mediated killing excluded. the antigens that may be targeted by cd8+ t cells also remain unclear, although self-antigens, including antigens shared with tumours, are more likely to be targets in the ovary than in the barrier organs, where most ici toxicities occur2. the report by winship et al.5 is an important first step in understanding how ici therapy may affect reproductive health and, more generally, how immune homeostasis is maintained in the ovaries. determining the specific mechanisms driving ici-mediated oocyte loss as well as the molecular targets of immunity will be critical to take this work forward.attention to reproductive ici toxicities is of considerable clinical importance given that, owing to ici therapy, including adjuvant treatment for melanoma, adjuvant and neoadjuvant treatment for triple-negative breast cancer, and the extremely promising early results for treating locally advanced mismatch-repair-deficient rectal cancer9, many of the tumour types most prevalent in young adults have the highest survival rates. in addition, anti-pd-1 therapy with pembrolizumab is approved for pediatric hodgkin’s lymphoma, underscoring the importance of assessing the effects throughout the course of reproductive development. indeed, similar to the results in reproductive-age mice in the study by winship et al.5, a decrease in primordial follicles was observed in prepubertal wild-type mice treated with pd-1 blockade, but not in nude mice, which have defective adaptive immunity5,10.adverse event reporting in clinical trials of icis so far also does not include information on reproductive toxicities, contributing to the current paucity of data. women of reproductive age were required to use two forms of birth control to participate in ici clinical trials, and menstrual cycle information was not systematically collected. the national comprehensive cancer network guidelines recommend the use of contraceptive methods for the entire duration of immunotherapy and for at least 5 months after the end of the treatment11. the more recent calls for attention to fertility are prudent, especially given the role of autoimmunity as a common etiology of premature ovarian insufficiency in patients who do not have cancer12,13. icis are presumed to be teratogenic on the basis of high expression of pd-l1 by human trophoblasts, but a small number of live births have been reported in woman who became pregnant while receiving ici therapy14. pituitary inflammation, termed hypophysitis, is a reasonably common side effect of ctla-4 blockade with ipilimumab, and this can lead to panhypopituitarism and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, but the levels of reproductive hormones, such as luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone and anti-müllerian hormone, have not been routinely monitored during ici therapy, and the occurrence of isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is not known15. a few cases of primary hypogonadism in the setting of ici use have been reported in men. although winship et al.5 provide supporting evidence for direct effects on the ovaries, the potential for icis to have concomitant effects on hypothalamic and or pituitary control of the reproductive axis has not been excluded and will be important to address in future preclinical studies. conversely, whether ovarian toxicities occur from ici therapy in patients is unknown15. the need for long-term monitoring of ici toxicities is also important, as immunotherapies can lead to persistent endocrinopathies, such as those observed in thyroiditis and autoimmune diabetes, even after discontinuation of therapy.at present, the direct relevance of the findings by winship et al.5 for patients remains unclear. even if these observations are murine-specific, the research focusing on the reproductive consequences of immunotherapy is extremely important. these issues had received insufficient attention from the field previously, considering the number of reproductive-age women who have been treated with icis so far. as immunotherapy enters its second decade of approval, a concerted focus on both the sex-specific and reproductive-stage effects of immunotherapy is warranted. although tissue-based immune analyses that have been performed in other organs may be impractical for evaluating gonadal ici toxicity, retrospective analyses of banked serum and plasma from previous ici trials, as well as prospectively designed cohorts, could allow longitudinal reproductive phenotyping. these studies would be able to assess menstrual cycle and fertility, monitor changes in gonadotropins and sex steroids and use imaging of antral follicle counts and serum markers (for example, anti-müllerian hormone) to estimate ovarian reserve. combined with animal model data, such patient assessments would provide insights into reproductive immune homeostasis, with critically important implications for the long-term reproductive health of patients treated with icis.pauken, k. e., dougan, m., rose, n. r., lichtman, a. h. & sharpe, a. h. trends immunol. 40, 511–523 (2019).cas article google scholar dougan, m., luoma, a. m., dougan, s. k. & wucherpfennig, k. w. cell 184, 1575–1588 (2021).cas article google scholar johnson, d. b., balko, j. m. & compton, m. l. et al. n. engl. j. med. 375, 1749–1755 (2016).article google scholar wang, d. y. et al. jama oncol. 4, 1721–1728 (2018).article google scholar winship, a. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00413-x (2022).article google scholar tawbi, h. a. et al. n. engl. j. med. 386, 24–34 (2022).cas article google scholar luoma, a. m. et al. cell 182, 655–671.e22 (2020).cas article google scholar sasson, s. c. et al. gastroenterology 161, 1229–1244.e9 (2021).cas article google scholar cercek, a. et al. n. engl. j. med. 386, 2363–2376 (2022).article google scholar xu, p. c. et al. j. endocrinol. 252, 15–30 (2021).article google scholar nccn guidelines https://go.nature.com/3ayuv8a (national comprehensive cancer network, accessed 6 june 2022).duma, n. & lambertini, m. oncologist 25, 277–278 (2020).article google scholar alesi, l. r., winship, a. l. & hutt, k. j. curr. opin. endocr. metab. res. 18, 15–28 (2021).cas article google scholar mittra, a. et al. oncologist 26, e1883–e1886 (2021).article google scholar garutti, m., lambertini, m. & puglisi, f. esmo open 6, 100291 (2021). erratum 6, 100276 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesdivision of endocrinology, boston children’s hospital, boston, ma, usastephanie a. robertsharvard medical school, boston, ma, usastephanie a. roberts & michael dougandivision of gastroenterology, massachusetts general hospital, boston, ma, usamichael douganyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to michael dougan.m.d. has research funding from novartis and eli lilly and company; has received consulting fees from tillotts pharma, oric pharmaceuticals, partner therapeutics, sqz biotech, azurrx, eli lilly and company, mallinckrodt pharmaceuticals, aditum and moderna; and is a member of the scientific advisory board for neoleukin therapeutics. s.a.r. declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsroberts, s.a., dougan, m. checking ovarian reserves after checkpoint blockade. nat cancer 3, 907–908 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00422-wdownload citationpublished: 25 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00422-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 