delivering light therapy using a remotely controlled bioelectronic device implanted above the brain might complement current glioblastoma therapies, reducing cancer recurrence and improving survival.you have full access to this article via your institution.malignant brain tumors, such as glioblastoma, are one the most difficult types of cancer to treat.surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are all part of the standard-of-care, yet the median survival of glioblastoma patients is less than 2 years because of aggressive tumor growth and metastasis1. for these patients, new therapeutic approaches that can combat tumor recurrence and prolong survival are urgently needed. writing in nature nanotechnology, arami et al. report a strategy that combines the unique advantages of nanomedicine and bioelectronics to enable remote delivery of therapy to brain tumors2.the strategy developed by arami et al. is based on two key components: gold nanostars and a wireless light-emitting device (fig. 1). the gold nanostars are injected directly into the tumor where they can destroy cancer cells through the photothermal effect, that is, heating via the absorption of light3. because the gold nanostars have a surface coating that enhances their diffusion and retention in the tumor, the heating is localized to tumor and spares healthy regions of the brain. the wireless light-emitting device is implanted under the scalp and above an optical window where the skull is surgically thinned. by activating a radio-frequency transmitter placed under the animal, the device illuminates the brain with near-infrared light, which penetrates deeply (about a centimeter) through tissue and delivers energy to the nanostars.gold nanostars are injected into the tumor, where a surface coating facilitates their diffusion and retention in the tumor. a wireless light-emitting device is implanted under the skin near the tumor. upon activation of an external radio-frequency transmitter, the device emits near-infrared light, which delivers energy to the nanostars and heats the tumor (photothermal heating), resulting in an antitumor effect.the authors combine both components in a therapeutic system that meets exacting requirements on the efficiency of power transfer from the transmitter to the wireless device to the nanostars. using this system, they remotely deliver photothermal therapy to the brains of mice with glioblastoma for 15 min each day. this treatment protocol significantly prolonged survival of athymic mice with human glioblastoma-derived tumors, compared to control groups that either received only one component of the therapy or were left untreated. in a separate study, the protocol also prolonged survival of immunocompetent mice with syngenic tumors, with even stronger effects when combined with daily administration of temozolomide, a drug widely used for glioblastoma chemotherapy.these striking results open the door for a range of clinical possibilities. glioblastoma recurs after the first surgical resection in almost all patients, most often within 2 cm of the border of the original lesion4. during surgical resection, a wireless light-emitting device could be implanted in the tumor cavity where it can be used to treat future recurrence. because the mechanisms of photothermal therapy are unique, it could be combined with other treatments, such as chemotherapy and immunotherapy, for enhanced antitumor effect5. sensors could also be incorporated in the device to measure the response of the tumor to the therapy and transmit data to clinicians, who can use it to determine the safest and most effective treatment plan.in order for these tantalizing possibilities to become a clinical reality, however, significant challenges still need to be overcome. first, the optimal route and frequency of administration of the nanostars will need to be established in humans. maintaining therapeutic amounts of nanostars in the tumor, in particular, may require the addition of drug delivery capabilities to the system6. second, the light delivery system will need to be adapted for use in the much larger human brain. the effective depth of irradiation may need to be extended to at least 2 cm — the depth at which most tumors recur — by increasing the light dose or optimizing the light distribution7. third, the wireless system will need to be modified for use in patients. ideally, patients will be able to administer therapy themselves from the convenience of home, simply by wearing a programmable transmitter above their head.it is poignant that one of the co-authors of this work, the late molecular imaging pioneer sanjiv sam gambhir, lost his teenage son to glioblastoma. gambhir devoted himself to the effort to save his son, despite knowing well the outcomes of patients with glioblastoma, saying and yet, you try8. while much more still needs to be done, the work of arami and coworkers embody gambhir’s spirit, bringing together cutting-edge tools from disparate fields to tackle this deadly disease in new ways.ostrom, q. t. et al. neuro. oncol. 22, iv1–iv96 (2020).article google scholar arami, h. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01189-y (2022).huang, x. et al. lasers med. sci. 23, 217–228 (2008).article google scholar campos, b. et al. oncogene 35, 5819–5825 (2016).cas article google scholar ng, c. w. et al. adv. funct. mater. 28, 1804688 (2018).article google scholar neuroinfuse drug delivery system. https://www.renishaw.com/en/neuroinfuse-drug-delivery-system--42358bansal, a. et al. pnas 115, 1469–1474 (2018).cas article google scholar greicius, j. and yet, you try. stanford medicine https://stanmed.stanford.edu/2016fall/milan-gambhirs-li-fraumeni-syndrome.html (2016).download referencesdepartment of electrical and computer engineering, singapore, singapore, singaporejohn s. hon.1 institute for health, national university of singapore, singapore, singaporejohn s. hodepartment of biomedical engineering national university of singapore, singapore, singaporeyong zhangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to john s. ho.j.s.h. is a scientific advisor to incando therapeutics, a biotherapeutics company developing phototherapy treatments for hard-to-treat cancers and other diseases.reprints and permissionsho, j.s., zhang, y. wireless nanomedicine for brain tumors. nat. nanotechnol. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01188-zdownload citationpublished: 22 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01188-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 