new research shows that a drug conjugate that links the dual ppar𝛼/𝛾 agonist tesaglitazar to a glp-1 receptor agonist has superior effects on weight loss and glucose metabolism compared with monotherapy in mice. the conjugate has actions in the hypothalamus that may contribute to its benefits.you have full access to this article via your institution.gut hormone analogues have brought considerable progress in our ability treat individuals with obesity and obesity-related comorbidities. long-acting glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (glp-1r) agonists potentiate endogenous glucose-induced insulin secretion, delay gastric emptying and induce a satiety effect that reduces food intake and body weight1. they now deliver substantially better weight loss2 and have demonstrated cardiorenal protective effects3, as well as the known improvements in glucose homeostasis. the second phase of this progress was the development of single agents that combine glp-1r agonism with a second mechanism of action. for example, molecules that combine the ability to activate the receptor for the gut hormone glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (gip), in addition to the glp-1r, have demonstrated even greater weight loss than is achieved with glp-1r agonists4. all of this promises to provide much better therapies for individuals with obesity than we have had to date.quarta et al.5 now take these advances a step further by covalently linking tesaglitazar to a glp-1r agonist using conjugation. tesaglitazar is itself a dual peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar) agonist with affinity to both pparα and pparγ, and was pursued as a type 2 diabetes and dyslipidaemia therapeutic but discontinued more than 15 years ago due to cardiac mitochondrial toxicity6. nonetheless, tesaglitazar can still be used as a useful tool compound. as ppars are nuclear receptors found in many cell types, a tesaglitazar–glp-1 peptide analogue conjugate could potentially direct tesaglitazar preferentially to cells that express the glp-1r, as the glp-1r is internalized and would provide tesaglitazar with a free ride only into those cells. the hope is that at least some of the benefits of tesaglitazar could be added to the beneficial effects of a glp-1r agonist but avoid the potential negative side effects by limiting tesaglitazar action to a relatively small number of cells that express both the glp-1r and ppars.intriguingly, at the doses tested, the tesaglitazar–glp-1r agonist conjugate provided better reductions in food intake, weight loss and glucose improvements than either a glp-1 agonist or tesaglitazar alone. all of these effects were absent in glp–1r knockout mice, indicating that these effects critically depend on the interaction of the conjugate with the glp-1r. the authors further found that there were a number of proteins in the hypothalamus that were upregulated by tesaglitazar and also by the tesaglitazar–glp-1r agonist conjugate. such a result does not prove that the critical site of action is in the hypothalamus, but does suggest that the compound is engaging key populations of neurons within this brain region. (fig. 1)the pparα/γ agonist tesaglitazar can be selectively directed to cells that also express the glp-1r by covalently linking tesaglitazar to a glp-1r agonist. the activation of both glp-1r and ppars results in superior weight loss and glucose improvements compared with either component alone.several lines of evidence indicate increased pparγ activity in the hypothalamus can contribute to increased food intake and body weight7,8 but, in the context of pparα/γ dual agonism in tesaglitazar, this is voided, which may imply that undirected activity of tesaglitazar at pparα counters that of pparγ to increase appetite. alternatively, the ability to deliver tesaglitazar only to cells that express the glp-1r may selectively activate ppars that reduce rather than increase food intake. this makes it tempting to speculate that, in some neuronal populations, there may be synergism between glp-1r and pparα/γ agonism to suppress appetite.a critical scientific question raised by these results is what subsets of glp-1r are most critical to mediate the effects of the tesaglitazar–glp-1r agonist conjugate. glp-1rs are widely distributed within the central nervous system (cns) and in other critical metabolic organs, such as pancreatic β-cells. the authors demonstrate, however, that enhanced activity of the tesaglitazar–glp-1r agonist conjugate is not at the level of insulin secretion, but rather at the level of insulin sensitivity that could be secondary to body weight loss mediated by actions in the cns. although the focus here was on actions in the hypothalamus, a healthy debate is still ongoing about the relative contribution of hypothalamus and other brain areas such as the dorsal vagal complex to the potent effects of glp-1r agonists9,10. location-specific deletion of the glp-1r could begin to delineate the key circuits that mediate the additional benefits that the dual agonist confers over a glp-1r agonist alone. it seems distinctly possible that the key glp-1rs that mediate the effects of glp-1r agonists may be different compared to those that are critical for directing the actions of tesaglitazar.the mechanistic questions in the study of quarta et al.5 extend to the role of pparγ agonism. pparγ agonists exert beneficial effects on glucose regulation in the face of weight gain. these agonists do so by expanding the population of healthy small adipocytes arising from the pool of stem cells within adipose tissue11,12. it is unclear whether a more narrowly directed pparγ agonist would produce these beneficial effects on adipose tissue. this raises a related question. are the beneficial effects of this dual agonist on glucose regulation secondary to weight loss? it is clear that actions of glp-1r agonists can produce benefits for glucose regulation through direct actions on the endocrine pancreas that are independent of their effects to reduce body weight. answers to all these questions could be important to identify the patient populations that would most benefit from this particular combination of mechanisms.the good news is that this work identifies a novel therapeutic strategy that has the ability to limit the potential downsides to previously attractive therapeutic targets that were deemed not sufficiently safe for the treatment of chronic diseases such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. this holds great promise to increase the size of the toolbox to treat these twin epidemics. obesity and type 2 diabetes are highly heterogenous diseases and so we should not expect that all individuals will respond equally to all pharmacological treatments. the study by quarta et al.5 hints that the future could be one in which we tailor very different pharmacological approaches to individual patients, with the ability to guide that therapy to a subset of cells that produce the maximum benefit while minimizing deleterious side effects.drucker, d. j. cell metab. 27, 740–756 (2018).cas article google scholar ahrén, b. et al. diabetes obes. metab. 20, 2210–2219 (2018).article google scholar kristensen, s. l. et al. lancet diabetes endocrinol. 7, 776–785 (2019).cas article google scholar jastreboff, a. m. et al. n. engl. j. med. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2206038 (2022).article pubmed google scholar quarta, c. et al. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00617-6 (2022).article google scholar kalliora, c. & drosatos, k. j. cardiovasc. pharmacol. 76, 514–526 (2020).cas article google scholar ryan, k. k. et al. nat. med. 17, 623–626 (2011).cas article google scholar sarruf, d. a. et al. endocrinol. 150, 707–712 (2009).cas article google scholar adams, j. m. et al. diabetes 67, 1538–1548 (2018).cas article google scholar ludwig, m. q. et al. diabetes 70, 1945–1955 (2021).cas article google scholar macdougald, o. a. & lane, m. d. annu. rev. biochem. 64, 345–373 (1995).cas article google scholar tontonoz, p. & spiegelman, b. m. annu. rev. biochem. 77, 289–312 (2008).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of surgery, university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, usarandy j. seeleyastrazeneca, gaithersburg, md, usachristopher j. rhodesyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to randy j. seeley.r.j.s. receives research support from astrazeneca, novo nordisk and fractyl. r.j.s. has served as a paid consultant for novo nordisk, scohia, cinrx, shouti pharma and fractyl. r.j.s. has equity in calibrate and rewind. this work was supported by nih grants to r.j.s. p01dk117821 and p30dk089503. c.j.r. is an employee of astrazeneca and owns astrazeneca stock.reprints and permissionsseeley, r.j., rhodes, c.j. who knew? ppars may act in the brain too. nat metab 4, 965–966 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00625-6download citationpublished: 22 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00625-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 