hello nature readers, would you like to get this briefing in your inbox free every day? sign up hereus president joe biden signs the inflation reduction act of 2022 into law on 16 august.credit: mandel ngan/afp via gettyseveral us government agencies will see a significant influx of cash from a massive climate and tax bill that president joe biden has signed. the legislation, called the inflation reduction act, pledges us$369 billion in climate investments over the next decade and could cut us greenhouse-gas emissions by about 30–40% below 2005 levels by 2030. scientists worldwide have welcomed the bill, but warn that more work is needed to counter global warming.nature | 5 min readphysicists have shown that an underground experiment in south korea can ‘see’ dark matter streaming through earth — or not, depending on how its data are sliced. the results cast further doubt on a decades-old claim that another experiment has been detecting the mysterious substance. an inadvertent error in data analysis strikes me as a potentially good — and maybe even likely — explanation for the fact that other dark-matter experiments have so far failed to replicate the detections, says dark-matter theorist dan hooper.nature | 6 min readreference: arxiv preprint (not peer reviewed)people infected with the alpha, delta and omicron variants of sars-cov-2 breathe out higher amounts of virus than those infected with other variants, according to a study that asked infected participants to sing and shout into a cone-shaped apparatus — with inevitable coughs and sneezes in between — for 30 minutes. this research showed that all three of those variants have won the infection race, says public-health engineer john volckens. the researchers found that people who contract covid-19 after vaccination, and even after a booster dose, still shed virus into the air.nature | 4 min readreference: medrxiv preprint (not peer reviewed)russia’s invasion of ukraine in february has stirred european interest in ploughing more money into defence research, after decades of being eclipsed by the united states in the field of warfare innovation. in the three months after the invasion, european nations announced increases of nearly €200 billion to their defence budgets, and eu politicians announced a flurry of strategies to boost the bloc’s combined military power, including promises to spend more on the research and development that will stock the next generation’s defence inventories, from drones to artificial intelligence.nature | 7 min readsource: aaas/eda/onsorganisms that contain dna from more than one species might be better equipped to handle climate change than their parent species, says biologist daniel rubinoff. when different species hybridize, genes that have evolved in one species can migrate to the other, potentially providing serious benefits such as disease resistance or adaptations to new environments. our actions will continue to cause extinctions across the tree of life, he says. but hopefully an old, previously unrecognized, habit of exchanging genes will provide an unexpected way for some species to dodge extinction.scientific american | 5 min readscience historian jim secord reflects on the mysterious disappearance — and equally mysterious return — of two of charles darwin’s notebooks to the cambridge university library. (the new yorker | 6 min read)