credit: s.harris/springer nature limitedone of the smallest changes a medicinal chemist can make to a compound is to swap a hydrogen atom for its isotope deuterium. but this tiny tweak can have an outsized effect. bristol myers squibb’s (bms's) first-in-class tyk2 inhibitor deucravacitinib now stands to prove the place for heavy hydrogen even in de novo drug discovery.this is a beautiful new target class and a new mechanism of action, says ryan moslin, senior principal scientist at bms and co-inventor of the drug. deuterium is an important part of that story.medicinal chemists have been incorporating deuterium into drug candidates since at least the 1970s, when researchers at merck & co. used it in the experimental antibiotic fludalanine. but the progress of these candidates through the clinic has been halting, and most recent efforts have used isotope swapping as a means of revitalizing old drugs and side-stepping intellectual property considerations. the fda’s 2017 approval of teva’s vmat2 inhibitor deutetrabenazine for chorea associated with huntington disease paved the path to market for deuterated reboots, with a drug that had nearly double the half-life of its parent molecule. a second deuterium switch programme is approaching fda review (box 1). but as lawyers have started pre-emptively claiming deuterium-switched analogues, the deuterium-switch window of opportunity may be closing. and as yet, no truly novel deuterated drugs have run the regulatory gauntlet.another deuterated drug targeting a jak for an inflammation-mediated disease could also be up for approval soon. concert pharmaceuticals expects to file its jak1/2 inhibitor ctp-543 in the first half of 2023 for alopecia areata, an autoimmune form of hair loss. if approved, it will be the second regulatory win for a deuterium-switched drug.ctp-543’s starting point was incyte’s jak1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib, a $4 billion per year drug that the fda first approved in 2011 for myelofibrosis. by replacing hydrogens with deuteriums, concert set out to enhance the compound’s exposure and half-life — providing more sustained jak inhibition. continued inhibition is probably an important aspect of the successful treatment of alopecia areata, says roger tung, ceo of concert pharmaceuticals. we do not believe that this would be possible with a similar or even somewhat higher dose of ruxolitinib.recent top-line results from two phase iii trials in over 1,200 alopecia areata patients, comparing twice-daily oral ctp-543 to placebo, show promise, reducing the severity of hair loss.competition is already lining up for the treatment of alopecia areata, which affects more than 300,000 people in the usa. in june, the fda approved a first systemic treatment for the indication — lilly’s daily jak inhibitor baricitinib. pfizer is advancing its jak3 inhibitor ritlecitinib for approval here.i think that there's going to be a market that will support multiple medically and commercially important drugs, says tung. our first, second and third interests right now are the approval of ctp-543.but the intellectual property (ip) landscape for the drug remains bumpy, with concert and incyte still locked in a legal battle. concert secured a recent win on a method-of-use patent, but incyte holds the upper hand on a composition-of-matter patent. there will be more lawsuits, predicts graham timmins, a biochemist at the university of new mexico. there's no way incyte is going to let this go.the window of opportunity for deuterium switching is narrowing, he adds. industry lawyers now pre-emptively protect their ip against this approach. these claims are not necessarily watertight, but they raise the legal risk for possible deuterium work-arounds for newer drugs.tracey pirali, a medicinal chemist at the university of piemonte orientale, agrees. it's considered obvious nowadays, she says.deucravacitinib could be the first. the fda is due to complete its review of the drug by mid-september. but deuterium is just one part of the drug’s novelty. it is also the leading selective inhibitor of tyk2, an inflammation-mediating kinase in the jak family of proteins. it would be the first drug designed to target a pseudokinase domain, a catalytically inactive protein domain carried by 10% of kinases. and given compelling activity in psoriasis and other inflammatory diseases, analysts are forecasting global sales of over us$2.8 billion by 2028.with deuterium use baked into drug discovery workflows, biochemist graham timmins, at the university of new mexico, expects that it is only a matter of time before more de novo deuterated compounds hit the clinic (table 1). people have seen it, and have taken notice. deuterium has gone totally mainstream.drugsponsorsproperties (parent molecule)lead indicationstatusde novodeucravacitinibbristol myers squibbtyk2 inhibitorplaque psoriasisndapha-022121pharvarisbradykinin b2 receptor antagonisthaephase iibms-986202bristol myers squibbtyk2 inhibitorpsoriasisphase ivx-984/m9831vertex/merck kgaadna-pk inhibitorcancerdiscontinueddeuterium switchdeutetrabenazineteva/auspexvmat2 inhibitor (tetrabenazine)tardive dyskinesia and huntington disease choreaapprovedctp-543concertjak1/2 inhibitor (ruxolitinib)alopecia areataphase iiivx-561vertex/concertcftr potentiator (ivacaftor)cystic fibrosisphase iiiavp-786otsuka/avanir/concertmoa unknown (deuterated dextromethorphan plus quinidine)agitation in alzheimer diseasephase iiialk-001alkeusvitamin a replacement (vitamin a)stargardt disease and amdphase ii/iiirt001retrotopelipoperoxidation inhibitor (linoleic acid)inad; psp, alsphase iipxl065poxel/deuterxpparγ-sparing glitazone (pioglitazone)nashphase iitrm-362tremeaucox2 inhibitor (etoricoxib)acute painpreclinicalsp-3164salarius/deuterxaiolos and ikaros degrader (avadomide)cancerpreclinicalnty-184neuromity/deuterxndri (bupropion)neurological disorderspreclinicalals, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; amd, age-related macular degeneration; cox2, cyclooxygenase 2; cftr, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; dna-pk, dna-dependent protein kinase; hae, hereditary angioedema; inad, infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy; jak, janus kinase; moa, mechanism of action; nash, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; nda, new drug application; ndri, norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor; pparγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; psp, progressive supranuclear palsy; tyk2, tyrosine kinase 2; vmat2, vesicular monoamine transporter type 2.but moslin remains circumspect about the isotope’s future. i don't think we have changed our use of deuterium significantly here, says moslin. if anything, it taught me to be more judicious about it. deuterium is a great tool, he explains, but not a fix all. in the case of deucravacitinib, it filled a narrow need: to slow the production of an otherwise promiscuous metabolite. we weren’t asking too much of it.when moslin started working at bms in 2010, the deucravacitinib programme was just a quirky side project. drug companies were hunting for drugs that could selectively inhibit tyk2, a kinase that mediates the effects of various immune and inflammatory cytokines. but small molecules that jam up the protein’s phosphorylating kinase domain tend to act across the related jak family, muddying the clinical potential and increasing the safety risks of these drug candidates. david weinstein, then principal scientist at bms and now head of chemistry at vividion, suspected that tyk2’s pseudokinase domain might provide a better toehold, but he couldn’t convince anyone to work on it.so, he threw it to the new guy, recalls moslin.moslin’s work quickly yielded pseudokinase binders that were active and selective for tyk2, and the sideshow became the main event. deuterium entered the scene early on.the team had found a promising and selective contender, but it had a metabolic soft spot — a readily cleaved methyl amide group. problematically, the resulting metabolites inhibited other kinases beyond tyk2. perhaps, moslin and colleagues theorized, replacing the hydrogen with deuterium on the offending methyl group would harden up this soft spot. this was a well-established strategy, and we thought it could work, he says.it did. when researchers gave a non-deuterated analogue of the drug to mice, 3% of the compound was converted into the non-selective metabolite. with a deuterated analogue, the non-selective metabolite was undetectable. it’s a pretty significant difference, says moslin.this is a textbook example of deuterium-induced ‘metabolic shunting’, says tracey pirali, a medicinal chemist at the university of piemonte orientale. c–d bonds are shorter and at times more stable than c–h bonds, and this can, in some cases, slow down the cleavage of a bond by just enough to avoid the production of non-selective or toxic metabolites. it was an elegant approach, says pirali. it was also a lucky approach, because you never know what happens with deuterium.deuterium has many other uses, she adds. applied appropriately it can also improve a compound’s half-life, stabilize a stereoisomer and more. a first approval for a de novo deuterated drug could be key to unleashing these benefits in other programmes, she adds. i think a new era is beginning, in which deuterium will be used from the very beginning in more drug discovery programmes, says pirali.this hope is supported by deucravacitinib’s clinical trial track record.two phase iii trials randomized nearly 1,700 psoriasis patients to deucravacitinib, amgen’s pde4 inhibitor apremilast or placebo. both trials met both co-primary endpoints — reducing the severity of disease versus placebo — and deucravacitinib beat the active comparator handily too, bms reported at the 2021 american academy of dermatology (aad) annual meeting.bms published results from the first of these trials in july.in terms of safety, all eyes are on the toxicities associated with the anti-inflammatory jak inhibitors, which as yet have not secured approval for psoriasis. the risks associated with these drugs include infections, heart attack, stroke, cancer, blood clots and death. last year, the fda slapped black box warnings on three approved anti-inflammatory jak inhibitors due to these concerns.in the first 666-patient pivotal trial of deucravacitinib, one recipient experienced a venous thromboembolism (vte). peter lio, a dermatologist at northwestern university, raised this as a cause for pause when bms presented last year. more work will be needed to see if this was simply unlucky, or if tyk2 selectivity also carries a potential increased risk for vte, said lio, who was not involved in trials of the drug. there were also four malignancies on treatment in this trial.but whereas jak inhibitors are associated with several lab abnormality red flags — including neutropenia, anemia, liver enzyme elevations and lipid elevations — deucravacitinib appears clean on this front. the results are impressive, said lio.because the risks of very rare adverse events are hard to conclusively assess in phase iii trials, jonathan sadeh, senior vice president of immunology and fibrosis development at bms, is similarly buoyed by the absence of lab abnormalities on treatment. this is the strongest feature that gives us so much confidence about the drug’s differentiated safety profile, says sadeh.the adverse events observed in the phase iii trial were mainly of mild or moderate severity. the most common side effects are nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infection and headache.it remains to be seen what the fda will rule on safety.the actual as well as the perceived safety will likely have significant impact on how deucravacitinib is received by clinicians and patients if and when it is approved, lio said.overall, the perspective we have is that deucravacitinib can be the oral standard of care for patients with moderate to severe psoriasis, says sadeh. if so, it will unseat apremilast, which currently brings in over $2 billion per year for amgen. celgene sold this drug to amgen for $13.4 billion in 2019 to address concerns that the bms–celgene merger could otherwise create a psoriasis monopoly.bms is also testing deucravacitinib in other anti-inflammatory indications, with phase iii trials ongoing in psoriatic arthritis and planned for systemic lupus erythematosus. a phase ii trial in ulcerative colitis failed last year, but sadeh hopes that a trial of a higher drug dose will fare better.tyk2 is one of the most exciting programmes we’ve been working on, says sadeh. we want to own this pathway.bms’s deuterated back-up candidate bms-986202 has been on standby since a phase i trial finished in 2016. the follow-up contender bms-986322 — with no disclosed structure — is now in phase i.but competitors are advancing too. nimbus recently reacquired rights to its tyk2-selective inhibitor ndi-034858, a drug developed by nimbus with financing and assistance from celgene. it also targets tyk2’s pseudokinase domain. bms acquired rights to this candidate via its 2019 acquisition of celgene, and nimbus subsequently sued bms to get the drug back. galapagos, ventyx biosciences and alumis are also developing tyk2-specific inhibitors. pfizer recently licensed its dual tyk2 and jak1 inhibitor brepocitinib to priovant.deucravacitinib may have also opened up other drug discovery opportunities. molecular biologist andrew wilks, who discovered jak1 and jak2 30 years ago, has long been advocating for more work on pseudokinase-targeted drugs. deucravacitinib now validates the specificity benefits these drugs can bring.while the 500 kinases of the human kinome are a treasure trove for drug developers, some of these proteins remain harder to target cleanly than others — due to the structural and functional similarities of their kinase domains. related but catalytically inactive pseudokinase domains, by contrast, have much more variation in both form and function. for medicinal chemists focused on specificity, it's plausibly a much easier ask to take on a pseudokinase domain than a kinase domain, says wilks, now at the university of melbourne.industry has largely avoided pseudokinase domains because they carry other challenges, including the need to laboriously unravel the biology of each pseudokinase domain and the impact of each pseudokinase binder. but deucravacitinib proves that the field is fertile. i'm greatly enthused by the demonstration that it is possible to get a clinical molecule that has a pharmacological effect on a pseudokinase target. it's a landmark achievement, he says. over 50 human proteins, including the other jaks, contain pseudokinase domains, and these proteins have been implicated in various diseases.deuterium’s role — as just one piece of a de novo compound that targets a novel protein domain to deliver a first-in-class drug — epitomizes how medicinal chemistry tools should be used, he adds. it's a real tour de force. three firsts in a single molecule — that's just showing off really, says wilks.