nerve impulses travel through cells as trains of electrical signals called action potentials, which arise from fast changes in voltage when ions move across the neuronal membrane. the membrane-spanning ion-channel proteins that mediate this process have fascinated scientists for more than half a century, since their existence was first proposed. the channels not only select for their preferred ion type — sodium (na+), calcium (ca2+) or potassium (k+) — but also sense changes in transmembrane voltage and respond by regulating the flow of ions through their pores. in 1987, a group headed by mark tanouye1, and another led by partners lily and yuh-nung jan2,3, took a key step towards understanding voltage-gated ion channels, identifying the first gene that encoded a k+ channel. their work opened the door to a tsunami of investigations, eventually leading to the determination of high-resolution structures for a wealth of k+ channels. read the paper: molecular characterization of shaker, a drosophila gene that encodes a potassium channelto understand a protein’s properties, one needs to determine what it looks like and how it functions. key to this is a knowledge of the protein’s amino-acid sequence, which is determined by the gene that encodes it. first, it is necessary to identify the gene and its location in the genome.in 1977, it was proposed that a gene named shaker encoded a k+ channel4. flies harbouring mutations in the gene displayed shaking legs under anaesthesia, and the same phenomenon occurred when wild-type flies were treated with k+-channel blockers. the tanouye and jan groups cloned shaker independently, but they used a similar approach, known as chromosome walking. this technique involves cloning overlapping sections of genomic dna, starting with a piece of dna that forms a duplex with a region around the shaker locus. the groups then looked for corresponding sequences in messenger rna libraries from fruit-fly brains, and discovered one sequence that was similar in predicted architecture to that of a previously cloned na+ channel5. read the paper: cloning of genomic and complementary dna from shaker, a putative potassium channel gene from drosophilawhereas the na+-channel sequence encodes a long polypeptide made of four similar repeats, producing a quasi-tetrameric protein, the k+-channel sequence was shorter, comparable to just one repeat in the na+ channel. like each of the na+-channel repeats, the protein encoded by the cloned k+ sequence was predicted to contain seven transmembrane regions (soon afterwards revised to six). injection of the mrna into frog eggs yielded ‘fast-inactivating’ k+ currents similar to those recorded in fly muscles6. the k+ and na+ channels, along with a ca2+ channel identified the same year, were therefore proposed to belong to a superfamily of voltage-dependent ion channels.generously, the jan and tanouye groups promptly shared their cloned dna with other researchers, leading to an explosion of discoveries in the field. a large community studying the channels quickly formed, performing rigorous and high-quality science. a multitude of different k+ channel-encoding genes were cloned over the next few years, by identifying sequences similar to that of shaker7. read the paper: sequence of a probable potassium channel component encoded at shaker locus of drosophilait soon became apparent that the k+ channels were a large family. because each gene encoded one subunit of a tetramer, subunits from different genes could mix and match (in contrast to the fixed subunit composition of the larger na+ and ca2+ channels); in doing so, they generated a wide variety of k+ channels with a range of properties7. this indicated that the channels could be differentially expressed in different tissues and at different times as physiologically needed.the abundance of k+ channels, combined with a new-found ability to manipulate genes, led to remarkably fast progress in the field. by the mid-1990s, a fairly detailed mechanistic understanding of k+ channels had started to emerge (reviewed in ref. 8).it was thought that k+ channels consisted of four subunits arranged symmetrically around a central aqueous ion-conduction pore, which held multiple ions arranged in single file (fig. 1). a better understanding of the pore-lining region required a redesign of the original proposed structure, adding a ‘re-entrant loop’, in which the loop between the last two transmembrane segments dips part of the way into the membrane. this loop included an evolutionarily conserved ‘signature sequence’ responsible for the selectivity of these channels for k+9. a region in the amino terminus of shaker was found to be responsible for rapid ‘ball-and-chain’ channel inactivation10, and a carboxy-terminal region for a slower inactivation process11. the fourth, positively charged, transmembrane segment was coined the voltage sensor, because it mediated the sharp changes in channel activity that occur during an action potential12.figure 1 | from potassium-ion channel cloning to structures. in 1987, two groups cloned the dna that encodes a potassium-ion (k+) channel for the first time1–3. the channel, called shaker, was predicted to contain seven membrane-spanning segments (cartoon adapted from fig. 6 of ref. 3). by 1991, experimental analysis had led researchers to predict that k+ channels were tetramers surrounding a central aqueous pore8 (in these cartoons, adapted from fig. 2 of ref. 8, only two of the four subunits are depicted, to highlight the ion-conduction pore). it was proposed that the channels could adopt closed, open or inactivated conformations, with the last conferred by an amino-terminal ‘ball-and-chain’ domain that blocks the pore to inactivate the channel. since 1998, high-resolution structures of k+ channels in closed13, open20 and inactivated17 conformations have validated this model. in these ribbon structures, two channel subunits are shown (grey), with the pore in the centre. purple spheres represent k+ ions in the pore. the orange ribbon represents the ball-and-chain domain, which plugs the pore of an open but inactivated gate.nevertheless, key questions remained. researchers knew the protein regions involved in voltage sensing, inactivation and selectivity, but the mechanisms underlying these processes were still a mystery. direct knowledge of the architecture and fine details of these channels was needed.from 1998, a structural-biology technique called x-ray crystallography began to provide some answers. the first crystal structure of an ion channel13 was that of a small k+ channel named kcsa, which was identified in a bacterial genome on the basis of its similarities to the k+ signature sequence. kcsa was a minimal channel composed of only the pore region. this could be isolated as a stable biochemical sample in amounts sufficient for growing the 3d ordered arrays of protein crystals essential for x-ray crystallography. two-pore channels open upthe kcsa structure validated years of biophysical research. finally, researchers could ‘see’ how the channel was put together from its amino-acid building blocks, and could visualize the k+ ions bound in the pore, the groups that lined the pore, and the protein–ion interactions. this led to insights into ion selectivity14 and slow inactivation15. in the following decade, several structures of bacterial and mammalian k+ channels were solved at atomic resolution16, with each one prompting its own flurry of structure–function investigations and molecular-dynamics simulations.in 2013, the advent of cryo-electron microscopy opened the floodgates for ion-channel structures, enabling determination of high-resolution protein structures without the need for crystallization. it is now possible to obtain structures of ion channels in many conformations (such as in ‘ball-and-chain’ inactivated states17), and in complex with interacting proteins, co-purified or isolated from native tissue. the dream of visualizing ion channels in situ, in the membranes of cells and intracellular organelles, is now within reach.our knowledge of the k+-channel genes and structures has greatly expanded our understanding of neuronal signalling. for example, researchers had known for decades that neuronal action potentials were possible only if both na+ and k+ channels were selective for their respective ions — and if their gating was carefully orchestrated such that na+ channels opened to allow influx of na+ before k+ channels opened to allow outflow of k+. structural biology has not only enabled us to understand how these channels achieve selectivity, sense voltage and inactivate; it has also revealed that na+ channels have faster voltage sensors than do k+ channels, which explains how they time their opening so precisely18. thus, we can finally understand and model electrical responses in neurons, opening up the possibility of modulating them. ion-channel mechanisms revealedin addition, the deluge of high-resolution structures has led to a surge in structure-based drug design. ion-channel malfunction is responsible for countless diseases, and channels are validated drug targets for conditions ranging from high blood pressure to anxiety and epilepsy. however, rational drug design has been difficult until recently because of a lack of structures in different conformations, and because researchers typically want to target one of several similar channels19. thanks to high-resolution structures, it’s now possible to assign functional states to different channel conformations. as a result, drugs can be designed to target specific channels in specific states, at particular interfaces between channels and accessory subunits. structure-based virtual and experimental drug screening and design are now in full swing.looking ahead, it will be exciting to follow developments in our understanding of how ion channels assemble into large supramolecular complexes, and how they interact with membranes to modulate diverse forms of signalling. in particular, visualizing how ion channels associate or segregate along neuronal projections, and at nodes of ranvier (gaps in neurons’ insulating sheaths) should yield unprecedented insights into the propagation of nerve impulses in the brain.it is awe-inspiring to see what a lasting influence the cloning of shaker has had. the jan and tanouye groups’ crucial decision to share their precious shaker clones has left a decades-long legacy of scientific achievements.