commensal gut bacteria harbour sulfotransferases that metabolize cholesterol and some steroid hormones to produce bacterially derived signals that influence host phenotypes.you have full access to this article via your institution.cholesterol is essential to eukaryotic life. it regulates key cellular functions such as membrane fluidity, cell signalling and hormone action and is the metabolic precursor to many steroid hormones, bile acids and vitamin d1. given these essential functions, cholesterol is at the centre of many disease processes; perhaps, most notably, those associated with cardiovascular disease (cvd). in developed countries, approximately one-fourth of all deaths result from atherosclerotic cvd, and it is well appreciated that cholesterol-rich lipoproteins are the main instigators of atherosclerotic plaque development2. we have a deep understanding of cholesterol absorption, biosynthesis, metabolism and feedback regulation in the human host1. however, there is some evidence that commensal bacteria can also directly metabolize cholesterol and related steroids in unique ways, suggesting that gut microbial cholesterol metabolism may be an underappreciated contributor to sterol-related disease.gut microbes have long been appreciated to play a key role in the metabolism of cholesterol-derived bile acids3. this includes enzymatic hydrolysis by bile salt hydrolases, desulfation and dehydroxylation to produce key secondary bile acids, such as deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid3. recent work has revealed that bacteria can also directly metabolize cholesterol itself to produce unique metabolites, such as cholestanone4 and coprostanol4, via dehydrogenase activity encoded by isma genes (fig. 1), and humans harbouring isma-encoding bacteria have significantly lower circulating cholesterol4.gut commensal microbes have previously been shown to degrade cholesterol to cholestenone and ultimately to coprostanol via dehydrogenase activity encoded by isma genes present in microbes such as eubacterium coprostanoligenes. the work by le et al. and yao et al. identified a prevalent sulfotransferase system in gut bacteroides spp. that acts on cholesterol and some related steroidal metabolites, including coprostanol, to generate sulfonated products, such as cholesterol sulfate. other microbial biotransformation mechanisms probably exist for the generation of unknown cholesterol metabolites. microbial metabolism of cholesterol is associated with reduced levels of cholesterol metabolites in the gastrointestinal tract and circulating in the blood, reduced leukocyte migration and, ultimately, the potential to improve cardiovascular health.writing in nature microbiology, le et al. and yao et al. find that commensal gut microbes are capable of sulfonating cholesterol and related steroids5,6. both groups initially characterized the gene cluster that harbours this sulfotransferase enzyme in the human commensal bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (bt). le et al. used an innovative fluorescent, click-chemistry-based labelling system to sort microbes that interact with cholesterol–alkyne probes in vivo and in vitro. using shotgun metagenomic analyses, they were able to identify cholesterol-interacting microbes, which ultimately led them to genes with putative roles in sulfonation. in addition to cholesterol, le et al. also find that the bacterial cholesterol degradation product, coprostanol, is sulfonated by bt. yao et al. uncovered bacterial sulfonation of cholesterol by comparing the levels of cholesterol sulfate in germ-free mice and mice monocolonized with bt. owing to previous reports that cholesterol sulfate is produced by the host enzyme sult2b1b7, they first investigated the expression of sult2b1b and found that there was no difference between the germ-free and bt-colonized mice, suggesting microbial production of cholesterol sulfate.both studies converge on the bt gene bt_0416, encoding the putative sulfotransferase enzyme, which depends on the upstream bt_0412–bt_0415 gene cluster to import free sulfate and synthesize the sulfate donor molecule, 3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (paps). both studies indicate that bt_0416 orthologues are present across the bacteroidetes phylum, and yao et al. also found orthologues in firmicutes and proteobacteria, with additional validation of sulfotransferase activity in parabacteroides merdae. yao et al. also comprehensively characterized the ability of bt_0416 to metabolize other steroidal metabolites and found that metabolites with a flat a/b ring system are also sulfonated by this enzyme. among these steroidal metabolites are the vitamin d3 analogue calcifediol; the bile acid isoallo-lithocholic acid, which has been reported to enhance regulatory t-cell differentiation; the sex hormone precursors, dehydroepiandrosterone and pregnenolone; and other dietary sterols such as β-sitosterol. functionally, the local production of cholesterol sulfate is associated with reduced migration of leukocytes in vitro in response to the chemokine ccl21 and altered preference for homing to the spleen rather than the mesenteric lymph node in vivo5,6. interestingly, the abundance of bt_0413–0416 homologues is reduced in the gut microbiome of patients with crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis in the human microbiome project, part 2 cohort6.although there are many congruent findings from these two studies, there are some differences that warrant further investigation. one contrasting finding is the ability of the bacterial genes involved in paps synthesis and sulfonation to be induced by cholesterol. le et al. found that bt_0412 and bt_0416 are induced by the addition of cholesterol to the culture media, whereas yao et al. found that these genes are constitutively expressed and the addition of cholesterol did not alter expression further. in addition, serum cholesterol sulfate in mice was significantly elevated in the le et al. study, whereas levels showed only increasing trends in the serum of mice used in the yao et al. study. these discrepancies may be attributable in part to the time at which the samples were collected and the delivery mode of cholesterol (that is, free, cyclodextrin-loaded or micellar cholesterol for in vitro studies and the diet for in vivo studies).collectively, these studies unveil a new function of the commensal gut microbiota that was originally thought to be performed by only host enzymes. given the use of monocolonization models for the in vivo mechanistic studies, the role of microbe–microbe interactions, which may prove important in the context of bacterially produced coprostanol as it is also sulfonated by bt_0416, is unclear. it will be critically important to understand the related roles of gut microbes and host enzymes in shaping the circulating and/or gut luminal concentrations of cholesterol sulfates and related metabolites. to fully understand the importance of commensal cholesterol sulfonation in sterol-related disease, it will be imperative to engineer cholesterol sulfonation capacity in diverse microbial communities that also have functional bile-salt-hydrolase activity, as well as bile acid desulfation and dihydroxylation capacity, given that cholesterol and bile acid homeostasis are tightly linked.despite the limitations, these findings hold potential therapeutic promise given the causal role that cholesterol and steroidal metabolites play in disease pathogenesis. the fact remains that atherosclerotic cvd is still the leading cause of mortality worldwide, and prolonged lowering of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol is the only effective strategy to address this. as our understanding of new lipid-metabolizing functions performed by the gut microbiota continues to improve, an exciting period lies ahead in which gut-microbe-targeted therapeutic strategies may synergize with host-targeted lipid-lowering drugs to improve atherosclerotic cvd outcomes. it is discoveries like those of le et al. and yao et al. that plant the seed for this exciting new possibility of host- and microbe-targeted co-therapies.luo, j. et al. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 21, 225–245 (2020).cas article google scholar steinberg, d. j. lipid res. 54, 2946–2949 (2013).cas article google scholar wahlström, a. et al. cell metab. 24, 41–50 (2016).article google scholar kenny, d. j. et al. cell host microbe 28, 245–257 (2020).cas article google scholar le, h. h. et al. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01195-9 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar yao, l. et al. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01176-y (2022).article pubmed google scholar javit, n. b. et al. endocrinology 142, 2978–2984 (2001).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of cardiovascular and metabolic sciences, lerner research institute of the cleveland clinic, cleveland, oh, usawilliam j. massey & j. mark browncenter for microbiome and human health, lerner research institute of the cleveland clinic, cleveland, oh, usawilliam j. massey & j. mark brownyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to william j. massey or j. mark brown.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmassey, w.j., brown, j.m. microbial regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. nat microbiol 7, 1327–1328 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01186-wdownload citationpublished: 18 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01186-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 