how pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma persists despite limited nutrients within the tumor microenvironment warrants further investigation. a study now identifies a metabolic mechanism wherein nufip1 induces release of nucleosides from cancer-associated fibroblasts, leading to activation of myc-dependent glucose consumption and tumor growth.you have full access to this article via your institution.a characteristic feature of the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (pdac) tumor microenvironment (tme) is fibrotic desmoplasia. notably, the desmoplastic pdac tme is composed mainly of cancer-associated fibroblasts (cafs), which have been previously characterized to promote tumor progression, metastasis and resistance to therapeutic intervention. the generation of cafs from one of their cellular precursors, quiescent pancreatic stellate cells, requires autophagy1. although the role of stromal autophagy has been implicated in pdac progression, the significance of autophagy-associated, organelle-specific degradation mechanisms in pdac stroma has not been explored. in this issue of nature cancer, yuan et al. describe a metabolic network in which caf-derived nucleosides promote pdac progression via myc-dependent glucose utilization2. this work underscores the ability of pdac tumors to utilize a diverse nutrient repertoire to persist in a nutrient-poor tme.in this study, the authors demonstrate a novel role for stromal ribosomal rna (rrna) degradation and consequent nucleoside release in pdac maintenance. the work builds upon the initial observation that, while necessary for pdac growth in vitro, glutamine metabolism is dispensable for the growth of orthotopically injected murine pdac lines. follow-up studies on this inconsistency between in vitro and in vivo phenotypes revealed caf rrna degradation and nucleoside secretion, dependent on the nuclear rna-binding protein nufip1, as necessary for pdac proliferation in glutamine-free conditions. mechanistically, the authors suggest that glutamine starvation activates nufip1-dependent rrna, but not r-protein degradation in cafs via translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and specific trafficking to autophagosomes (fig. 1).caf-derived nucleosides are released into the tme for uptake by pdac tumor cells in a nufip1-dependent manner. as a result, pdac tumors upregulate myc-dependent glucose consumption to ameliorate nutrient stress and promote tumor growth.in metabolic tracing experiments, yuan et al. demonstrated that nucleosides derived from nufip1-dependent rrna lysosomal degradation are secreted by cafs to be taken up by pdac cells, thereby facilitating pdac growth2. under glutamine-starved conditions, add-back experiments with nucleoside-supplemented media rescued this growth phenotype in pdac cells. in addition, uptake of caf-derived nucleosides prompted the activation of glucose metabolic pathways in pdac cells and resulted in an increase in oxygen consumption rate. importantly, carbon tracing studies revealed that pdac cells did not utilize these nucleosides as carbon sources in glucose metabolic pathways. instead, treatment of pdac cells with caf-derived nucleosides led to the upregulation of the glucose transporter slc2a1 in order to increase glucose utilization. knock-down experiments highlighted slc2a1 as necessary for mediating glucose uptake and pdac proliferation following incubation with caf-derived nucleosides.to evaluate the mechanism mediating this slc2a1-dependent glucose uptake, yuan et al. performed transcriptomic profiling of pdac cells incubated with caf-derived nucleosides in the absence of glutamine2. gene set enrichment analysis revealed differential upregulation of myc target genes and subsequent perturbation studies indicated that nucleoside-induced glucose uptake was myc-dependent. specifically, the authors suggested pdac cell survival relies heavily on the myc 3′ utr.finally, the authors assessed the significance of this metabolic pathway for pdac progression in vivo. treatment of orthotopic models of pdac with the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine in combination with glutaminase inhibition revealed a significant reduction in tumor growth, suggesting potential therapeutic relevance of inhibiting this pathway in vivo. evaluation of this pathway as a potential therapeutic target is especially relevant considering the authors finding that high stromal nufip1 protein expression correlated with reduced overall survival in pdac patients. in conclusion, although a fibroblast-specific conditional nufip1-knockout mouse model of pdac displayed no effect on collagen deposition or desmoplasia, outgrowth of the tumor relied on nufip1-mediated nucleoside secretion and increased glucose metabolism in a myc-dependent manner.in order to adapt to nutrient and oxygen gradients within spatially heterogeneous tmes, cancer cells adapt to meet the demands of proliferation through cell-autonomous and paracrine mechanisms. the findings of yuan et al. identify a novel stress adaptation mechanism relevant to glutamine-low regions of pdac2 with potential implications for metastatic spread. while glutamine depletion acts on cafs to promote nufip1-dependent nucleoside release and paracrine regulation of myc protein expression, glutamine depletion also directly impacts pdac cells to promote induction of atf4 and downstream activation of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (emt) transcriptional program to drive metastasis3. as atf4 is myc-inducible, and atf4 and myc act cooperatively to promote cellular adaptation and myc-dependent tumor progression4, this axis may thus represent a molecular point of convergence for neoplastic and stromal signals. specifically, the myc–atf4 axis may drive metabolic adaptation mechanisms and support tumor growth and metastasis, in response to nutrient stress.that genetic inhibition of nufip1 in the stroma did not impair fibroblast activation or reduce the abundance of collagen deposition makes this nufip1-mediated pathway a potential basis to parse the beneficial from the detrimental functions of pdac cafs. while the metabolic functions of these cells are tumor-promoting5,6, the tumor-suppressive potential of pdac cafs has been convincingly demonstrated7,8 and results in part from the unexpected tumor-restraining role of caf-derived type i collagen in this disease setting9,10. inhibition of nufip1 or its downstream effectors may thus enable maintenance of the tumor-restraining functions of pdac cafs while suppressing their capacity to induce myc in cancer cells, and enable metabolic adaptation and tumor growth. to this end, the context-dependent requirement for nufip1 and stroma-derived nucleosides across the tme for regulation of myc level and proliferative capacity will be important to understand. for instance, myc levels may be independent of stromal nufip1 at the tumor periphery or in regions of relatively high glutamine concentrations, and there may be variability in the dependence on this pathway across patient specimens based on the constellation of cancer cell-intrinsic mutations in kras and other genes that impact myc stability and activity.while yuan et al. understandably focused on the significance of stromal nufip1 for pancreatic cancer biology2, these findings have potential implications for therapy beyond the combination treatment with chloroquine and glutaminase inhibitor 968 displayed in their study. the demonstrated stromal resistance mechanism to glutaminase inhibition alone complements recent investigation of pdac cell-intrinsic mechanisms of resistance, albeit to a distinct glutaminase inhibitor compound11. these studies together support implementation of heterocellular culture systems for screening of new therapeutic agents in light of intrinsic and extrinsic resistance mechanisms, and, of course, rigorous testing in intact tmes. implications of this novel metabolic crosstalk mechanism also extend to response to conventional chemotherapy, and specifically to a chemotherapeutic standard of care for pdac, gemcitabine. considering that nucleoside release by macrophages and cafs has been shown to inhibit pdac cell toxicity in response to treatment with gemcitabine12,13, the findings of yuan et al.2 may implicate nufip1 inhibition as a means to foster improved efficacy of nucleoside analogs in pdac. finally, therapeutic means to inhibit kras–myc signaling may remodel the pdac immune microenvironment to enable efficacy of immune-targeted therapies, in light of the central role of myc in the neoplastic compartment in driving pdac immune suppression14. if inhibition of stromal nufip1 signaling leads to biologically meaningful reductions in myc levels in pdac cells, such an intervention may cooperate with immunotherapies to evoke a much-needed immune response against pancreatic cancer.auciello, f. r. et al. cancer discov. 9, 617–627 (2019).cas article google scholar yuan, m. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00426-6 (2022).article pubmed google scholar recouvreux, m. v. et al. j. exp. med. 217, e20200388 (2020).cas article google scholar tameire, f. et al. nat. cell biol. 21, 889–899 (2019).cas article google scholar auciello, f. r. et al. cancer discov. 9, 617–627 (2019).cas article google scholar sousa, c. m. et al. nature 536, 479–483 (2016).cas article google scholar rhim, a. d. et al. cancer cell 25, 735–747 (2014).cas article google scholar ozdemir, b. c. et al. cancer cell 25, 719–734 (2014).cas article google scholar bhattacharjee, s. et al. j. clin. invest. 131, e146987 (2021).cas article google scholar chen, y. et al. cancer cell 39, 548–565 (2021).cas article google scholar biancur, d. e. et al. nat. commun. 8, 15965 (2017).cas article google scholar halbrook, c. j. et al. cell metab. 29, 1390–1399 (2019).cas article google scholar dalin, s. et al. cancer res. 79, 5723–5733 (2019).cas article google scholar sodir, n. m. et al. cancer discov. 10, 588–607 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of cell, developmental & cancer biology, oregon health & science university, portland, or, usaholly sandborg & mara h. shermanknight cancer institute, oregon health & science university, portland, or, usamara h. shermanyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to mara h. sherman.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssandborg, h., sherman, m.h. nufip1+ stroma keeps pdac fed. nat cancer 3, 909–910 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00421-xdownload citationpublished: 18 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00421-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 