greenland is rich in natural mineral resources and has been actively investigating the economic potential of expanded mineral extraction. however, public opinion calls for the assessment of the environmental and social impacts of mineral extraction.you have full access to this article via your institution.as climate change exacerbates, greenland is receiving more attention, and the world watches as the inland ice begins to melt. almost 80% of greenland is covered by ice and, as the climate warms, an enormous amount of sand is released from the melting ice cap. this brings new economic possibilities for glacially derived sand extraction. writing in nature sustainability, bendixen and colleagues1 assess the public support for pursuing the extraction of glacially derived sand as an emerging avenue for opportunistic climate adaptation.citizen involvement in decision-making on resource extraction is invaluable, as resource projects can change the livelihoods of particular greenlandic settlements2,3. historically, many initiatives have been imposed on the greenlandic population, and the traumas from top-down danish policies are still experienced by many of the inhabitants. today, policies related to land-based mineral extraction are decided by the greenlandic government, which considers resource projects to be a cornerstone to obtain a diversified economy and become financially independent from denmark4. currently, greenland receives an annual block grant amounting to roughly half of its national budget (approximately us$650 million) from the danish government.in response to discussions initiated in 2019 regarding the opportunities for establishing a glacially derived sand industry, an economic assessment of the potential for such industry was requested by the greenlandic government. despite the reality of global sand and gravel scarcity5, the assessment questioned the feasibility of shipping sand from greenland to europe or north america6,7. parallel to this process, bendixen and colleagues engaged in the question of public support for the opportunities arising from the melting of the greenland ice sheet. they launched the first representative survey of greenlanders’ (n = 939) views on glacially derived sand extraction. the authors find that the majority support extracting and exporting sand but oppose foreign involvement, revealing broad support for domestically led business ventures. they also underline the importance of environmental and social impact assessments for such a national business venture.this is an important contribution as it conveys to the greenlandic politicians that there is a wish for a domestically driven business. the lack of surveys of public opinion on resource projects became a central topic of debate in parliamentary elections last year, which concerned the mining activities that included uranium as a by-product in kujalleq in south greenland (fig. 1). it appeared that most of those against the project lived in the capital nuuk, while the communities in south greenland, nearer to the proposed mining operation, favoured the development of local economic opportunities. by contrast, the findings from bendixen and colleagues show a united greenlandic voice concerning the broad support for a domestic-led business venture extracting glacially derived sand resources.qaqortoq town in kujalleq municipality in south greenland.the sand resources are emerging because of a warming climate, and bendixen’s findings show that those aware of anthropogenic climate change are both significantly more likely to support mining of glacially derived sand and also more likely to stress the importance of an environmental impact assessment. however, one limitation is the lack of appropriate timing, as starting any export of the sand deposits may take several years, thus it is uncertain whether their study would be useful if export only becomes viable in, for example, ten years.overall, the conclusion is that the greenlandic population appreciates the economic opportunities presented by the melting ice sheet and accumulating sand resources. their findings are relevant in the event that the economic situation changes and it suddenly becomes viable to export the many million tons of sand emerging under the melting glaciers. thereby, one can argue that the study contributes to greenlandic society’s preparedness; it provides an indication of public opinion for the greenlandic political leadership regarding glacially derived sand extraction. people in greenland support what bendixen and colleagues identify as opportunistic climate change adaptation. greenlandic people follow in the footsteps of their ancestors by being pragmatic and taking advantage of the available possibilities for surviving some of the harshest climate conditions on earth.bendixen, m., nielsen, r. l., plesner, j. l. & minor, k. nat. sustain. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00922-8 (2022).article google scholar olsen, a.-s. h. & hansen, a. m. impact assess. proj. apprais. 32, 72–80 (2014).article google scholar hansen, a. m., vanclay, f., croal, p. & skjervedal, a.-s. h. extr. ind. soc. 3, 25–33 (2016). google scholar poppel, b. in arctic yearbook 2018 (thematic network on geopolitics and security of the university of the arctic, 2018).torres, a. et al. science 357, 970–971 (2017).cas article google scholar thaarup, s. m., poulsen, m. d., thorsøe, k. & keiding, j. k. study on arctic mining in greenland no. 57 (ministry of economic affairs and employment, 2020).torres, a. et al. one earth 4, 639–650 (2021).article google scholar download referencesnordregio, stockholm, swedenleneisja jungsbergyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to leneisja jungsberg.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjungsberg, l. turning greenland’s sand into gold. nat sustain (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00945-1download citationpublished: 18 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00945-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 