the presence of topologically protected edge states is usually determined by angular-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy, requiring clean surfaces and ultrahigh vacuum. now, an all-optical technique, based on high-harmonic radiation, has been shown to detect topological phase transitions under ambient conditions.you have full access to this article via your institution.high-harmonic generation is a nonlinear process by which short-wavelength radiation is emitted with photon energies that are multiples of the incident photon energy. high-harmonic generation in solids is efficient up to tens of multiples of the primal frequency if the incoming laser field is strong enough (but below the damage threshold) and the photon energy is well below the bulk bandgap1. the dynamics of the strong-laser-driven electrons not only depend on the non-isotropic dispersion relation determined by the bulk’s valence and conduction bands but also on their berry curvatures2 and, possibly, edge bands3,4. in topological insulators such as bismuth selenide (bi2si3), these edge bands are topologically protected. by doping a fraction x with indium to obtain (bi1–xinx)2se3 one can reduce the spin–orbit coupling strength and thus render the system topologically trivial with increasing x (ref. 5).now, as they report in nature photonics, christian heide, yuki kobayashi and colleagues have measured high-harmonic spectra from bismuth selenide for x = 0 (topological) and x = 0.2 (already trivial) and found striking differences in the harmonic response6. they shot 100-fs laser pulses of central wavelength 5 μm and intensity 5.4 × 1010 w cm–2 onto thin-film samples of (bi1–xinx)2se3 that were capped with a thin selenium layer (not generating harmonics) such that the experiments could be performed under ambient conditions. the harmonics were measured in transmission and as a function of the crystal orientation, the polarization of the incident laser pulse and its intensity (fig. 1). for strong circularly polarized incident light, the yield of the fifth harmonic turned out to be negligible for the trivial-phase case x = 0.2, but maximized for the topological phase with x = 0. for strong linear polarization it is the opposite; that is, a minimum is obtained in the topological case and a maximum (albeit smaller) in the trivial case. with decreasing laser intensity, the strong harmonic yield for incident circular polarization goes away. the authors’ explanation is that, for small laser intensity, the laser-driven electrons only probe the almost isotropic part of the dirac cones that describes the edge bands around the centre of the brillouin zone (the γ point). at higher crystal momentum, the dirac cones ultimately have to ‘warp’ towards the hexagonal structure of the brillouin zone, accompanied by a rotation of the spins away from the dirac cones7. with increasing laser intensity, this deviation from isotropy is sensed by the laser-driven electrons and helps efficient generation of harmonics for circularly polarized driving fields.an incident mid-infrared (mir) pulse impinges on a thin (bi1–xinx)2se3 sample, generating high-harmonic radiation that is measured in transmission. the polarization and the intensity of the incident pulse can be changed, as well as the orientation (ϕ) of the solid sample with respect to the polarization. the yield of the harmonics and their polarization is measured.the results obtained by heide et al. can only be understood with the help of an adequate modelling of high-harmonic generation in bismuth selenide. the non-perturbative electron dynamics is simulated by solving the semiconductor bloch equations. to that end, the bulk’s valence and (first) conduction band and all the periodic parts of the bloch wavefunctions are required to calculate the berry connections and the transition matrix elements. the authors did that using a four-component tight-binding description that takes spin properly into account8. since the harmonic generation due to the two-dimensional surface states is the central theme of the work, the authors had to take them into account explicitly. they evaluated them by making the tight-binding model in the respective direction finite while maintaining the bulk with respect to the other two directions. this leads to the two-dimensional dirac-cone-like surface bands including the hexagonal warping. despite the fact that a coupling between the bulk and the surface bands was not taken into account, the agreement between measurement and simulation is good. yet, one needs to have the semiconductor bloch results at hand to pin down convincingly that the observed change in the harmonic yield is of topological origin. unfortunately, there is no simple feature in the harmonic spectra that would make it possible to determine from experiment alone whether the solid in the laser focus is in a topological phase or trivial.for elliptically polarized driving fields, heide and co-workers found a strong elliptical dichroism in the topological phase and only a very small one for the trivial phase. that means that the harmonic generation process is chiral in bi2se3 due to a non-vanishing berry curvature of the bands involved. however, in general, non-vanishing berry curvature alone does not imply that the system is in a topological phase. one needs again accompanying theory and simulations to figure out if the chiral behaviour originates from the berry curvature of the bulk bands or if really topologically protected surface states have a role in the high-harmonic generation. the combination of strong lasers with modern condensed-matter physics is not only of fundamental interest but may allow, in the longer term, an ultrafast steering of topologically protected surface currents that are immune to dissipation9 or the tuning of topological phase transitions by laser dressing10. further, high-harmonic generation is sensitive to charge-carrier dynamics and structural changes in condensed matter on the sub-cycle timescale. however, before measuring dynamics one should first thoroughly understand how the unperturbed system affects harmonic spectra. the work by heide et al. is an important step in that direction.goulielmakis, e. & brabec, t. nat. photon. 16, 411–421 (2022).ads article google scholar liu, h., li, y. & you, y. et al. nat. phys 13, 262–265 (2017).article google scholar schmid, c. p. et al. nature 593, 385–390 (2021).ads article google scholar jürß, c. & bauer, d. preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12810 (2022).brahlek, m. et al. phys. rev. lett. 109, 186403 (2012).ads article google scholar heide, c. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01050-7 (2022).article google scholar fu, l. phys. rev. lett. 103, 266801 (2009).ads article google scholar mao, s., yamakage, a. & kuramoto, y. phys. rev. b 84, 115413 (2011).ads article google scholar reimann, j. et al. nature 562, 396–400 (2018).ads article google scholar hübener, h. et al. nat. commun. 8, 13940 (2017).ads article google scholar download referencesinstitute for physics, university of rostock, rostock, germanydieter baueryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to dieter bauer.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbauer, d. optically sensing topological phase transitions. nat. photon. 16, 614–615 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01063-2download citationpublished: 18 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01063-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 