designing viable molecular candidates is pivotal to devising low-cost and sustainable storage systems. a reinforcement learning framework has been developed that can identify stable candidates for redox flow batteries in the large search space of organic radicals.you have full access to this article via your institution.there is an increased reliance on renewable energy sources such as solar and wind to sustainably tackle the ever-growing energy demands of human activities. their intermittent availability further necessitates efficient energy storage systems to ensure that energy is reliably available at all times. a promising grid-level energy storage solution is aqueous redox flow batteries (arfbs), which store surplus electricity using electrolytes dissolved in the safest and cheapest possible liquid medium — water. this energy can then be released on demand with minimal loss and at easily scalable capacities. organic molecular electrolytes are attractive alternatives to the currently dominant metal-based materials used in arfbs. they are highly tailorable and may have a smaller environmental footprint than metal resources, which are becoming scarce1. there is consequently a strong motivation to find better organic molecules that are low-cost, stable and operable in high-voltage devices. however, it is not an easy task to select the best candidates from nearly infinite possible combinations of atoms. writing in nature machine intelligence, s. v. et al. demonstrate a workflow for generating and evaluating radical organic species as candidates for electrolytes in aqueous flow batteries2.ideal organic molecules for redox flow batteries are expected to store energy at high densities and exhibit long lifetimes over repeated charge–discharge cycles, which require the molecules to be stable in all of the relevant oxidation states. these states are relatively well-understood for molecules such as quinones3 and phenazines4 that undergo proton-coupled oxidation and reduction. other promising materials (such as viologens and organic radicals) introduce another layer of complexity to the design problem owing to the potential reactivity of radical species. a major roadblock to material discovery in these chemical spaces is the lack of quantitative metrics of radical stability in aqueous environments. predicting molecular stability is non-trivial because it involves exhaustively identifying key failure mechanisms and evaluating their plausibility. recent work from the same group of researchers attempted to bridge this gap by constructing a computed radical stability score5. this score quantifies how localized the radical electron is and how protected it is from reacting with other species. however, these electrolyte molecules should also meet a long list of other requirements, such as appropriate redox potentials for high cell voltages, high water solubility that maximizes energy density, and low synthesis costs. as these requirements are highly complex and non-trivial to optimize, this multi-objective optimization problem is challenging to tackle with traditional trial-and-error approaches.given that molecular spaces are often too large to search through by manual approaches, more scalable refinement techniques are required. machine learning models, specifically generative models such as variational autoencoders and genetic algorithms, have emerged as promising tools for exploring these spaces and designing molecules with specific properties6. generative models in chemistry have proven to be successful in the discovery of drug candidates7, such as the rapid identification of ddr1 kinase inhibitors8. we also note the increasing interest in using them for energy applications9. with a focus on molecules for battery materials, s. v. et al.2 use a generative model to leverage a reinforcement learning algorithm based on alphazero — the famous program developed by deepmind to master boards games including chess and go2. this algorithm builds candidate molecules from a single carbon atom by performing actions that consist of adding more atoms and/or bonds, one at a time, up to a maximum of 12 (excluding hydrogen atoms). the space of possible actions — leading to different molecules — is searched with the monte-carlo tree search (mcts) algorithm and evaluated using two surrogate graph neural network models trained on thousands of quantum chemistry simulations. because battery candidates must meet several criteria, the authors designed a reward function that simultaneously optimizes for several properties related to high stability and redox potentials. by rewarding actions that lead to molecules with promising battery properties, the authors taught the algorithm to successively construct better molecules.using this reinforcement learning algorithm, the authors searched for suitable organic radicals that can both be reduced and oxidized by one electron, to be used as both the catholyte and anolyte in redox flow batteries (fig. 1). this goal is ambitious because the only organic radical currently used in arfbs is unsuitable as a catholyte. the authors demonstrated success in generating 32 provisionally synthesizable and novel candidates that maximize the reward function corresponding to a good redox flow battery. the most impressive aspect of this work is the holistic consideration of several, potentially competing objectives that define redox flow battery materials. the strategy and workflow outlined in this work also apply to the search for other promising organic electrolytes, particularly those that rely on radical species during charging or discharging processes.a workflow to generate new organic radicals as electrolytes for aqueous redox flow batteries. density functional theory (dft) calculations of a database of organic radicals were used to train two graph neural networks (gnns) as predictive models for redox potentials (gnn 1) and radical stability (gnn 2). new molecules were constructed on computation nodes by rollout workers using a reinforcement learning strategy. bonds and atoms were added iteratively to a single carbon atom. a monte-carlo tree search (mcts) framework was used to navigate this chemical space of 109 possible molecules: 106 radicals were evaluated using the predictive models, and the search policy was trained to bias toward candidates with high radical stability and favourable redox potentials. further analysis with more accurate models narrowed down the top-ranked 1,078 final structures to 32 synthesizable radical electrolytes. in the study by s. v. et al., the rollout workers were distributed computational resources that generate new molecules according to the current state of the reinforcement learning algorithm2.the next step will be to test the top contenders experimentally. further investigation of the degradation mechanisms of proposed radicals may reveal additional design considerations for better molecules. experimental results can then be used to further calibrate the predictive models and to iteratively improve the quality of both the discovered molecules and the workflow itself. emerging material acceleration platforms (maps)10 offer exciting opportunities for closed-loop material discovery by combining automated experimentation with data-driven generative models, such as those proposed by s. v. et al.2. we look forward to new molecules for aqueous energy storage being discovered, experimentally validated and eventually brought to the market.li, z. & lu, y.-c. adv. mater. 32, 2002132 (2020).article google scholar s. v., s. s. et al. nat. mach. intell. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00506-3 (2022).huskinson, b. et al. nature 505, 195–198 (2014).article google scholar hollas, a. et al. nat. energy 3, 508–514 (2018).article google scholar s. v., s. s. et al. chem. sci. 12, 13158–13166 (2021).article google scholar sanchez-lengeling, b. & aspuru-guzik, a. science 361, 360–365 (2018).article google scholar yang, x., wang, y., byrne, r., schneider, g. & yang, s. chem. rev. 119, 10520–10594 (2019).article google scholar zhavoronkov, a. et al. nat. biotechnol. 37, 1038–1040 (2019).article google scholar de luna, p., wei, j., bengio, y., aspuru-guzik, a. & sargent, e. nature 552, 23–27 (2017).article google scholar seifrid, m., hattrick-simpers, j., aspuru-guzik, a., kalil, t. & cranford, s. matter 5, 1972–1976 (2022).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry, university of toronto, toronto, ontario, canadayang cao, cher tian ser, kjell jorner & alán aspuru-guzikdepartment of computer science, university of toronto, toronto, ontario, canadamarta skreta, kjell jorner, nathanael kusanda & alán aspuru-guzikvector institute for artificial intelligence, toronto, ontario, canadamarta skreta & alán aspuru-guzikdepartment of chemistry and chemical engineering, chalmers university of technology, gothenburg, swedenkjell jornerdepartment of materials science & engineering, university of toronto, toronto, ontario, canadaalán aspuru-guzikdepartment of chemical engineering & applied chemistry, university of toronto, toronto, ontario, canadaalán aspuru-guziklebovic fellow, canadian institute for advanced research, toronto, ontario, canadaalán aspuru-guzikyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to yang cao or alán aspuru-guzik.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionscao, y., ser, c.t., skreta, m. et al. reinforcement learning supercharges redox flow batteries. nat mach intell (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00523-2download citationpublished: 12 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00523-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 