a study published in nature structural & molecular biology now unveils, at the atomic level, the initial mechanisms of prion toxicity, providing insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of a protein neurodegenerative disease caused by protein misfolding.you have full access to this article via your institution.prions are bizarre, deadly pathogens composed only of protein1. they cause fatal neurodegenerative ailments associated with gory popular names such as ‘laughing death’, ‘mad cow disease’ and ‘zombie deer disease’. recent exciting breakthroughs in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-em) have allowed for the deciphering of their structures and from them, the understanding of their unorthodox mechanism of propagation. but what about the mechanisms underlying their toxicity? in this issue of nature structural & molecular biology, frontzek et al. unveil the initial steps of the mechanism of prion toxicity at the atomic level, and thus start to close the gap between toxicity and structural studies2.prions can arise in anyone’s brain, apparently ex nihilo, by a spontaneous generation of sorts. however, such an occurrence is nothing but an exceedingly rare misfolding event in which a brain protein, prpc, adopts the alternative prionic conformation, prpsc. once formed, prpsc can coerce prpc units to convert to prpsc through a templating mechanism. as prpsc spreads through the brain, a trail of neuronal death follows1. prpsc prions can also propagate between individuals. this has occurred as a consequence of cannibalism, either ritual, as in the kuru disease of the fore people, or industrial, as in the feeding of cattle with meat and bone meal among the european people3. in addition, some prions can leak from the brain into the lymphoreticular system, reach excreta such as urine or feces and contaminate grazing grounds, as in ovine scrapie and cervid chronic wasting disease3. there are inter-species transmission barriers but they are not absolute, and extensive transmission of animal prions to humans occurred during the bovine spongiform encephalopathy epizootic that ravaged europe in the 1980s and 1990s (ref. 3).the recent deciphering of prpsc structures at atomic resolution, made possible by impressive technical advances in cryo-em, has opened the possibility of understanding these transmission barriers in detail4,5,6, and is revolutionizing our understanding of prion propagation at large.by contrast, our understanding of prion toxicity mechanisms to date has been less detailed. prpsc by itself is innocuous: it needs interaction with prpc to exert its toxicity7. the current study by frontzek et al. dissects such interaction at the atomic level2. the authors build on their previous observation that a prpc-specific antibody, pom1, is a potent prpsc mimic that kills cells just as prpsc prions do7. pom1 constitutes an extraordinary tool to explore prion toxicity because, as opposed to the insoluble, heterogeneous and intractable prpsc, it is a homogeneous, soluble and practical reagent. frontzek et al.2 use nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy and molecular dynamics analysis to identify what happens when pom1 binds prpc, that is, the very first event in the pathogenic cascade, with atomic detail.the authors find that an intramolecular hydrogen bond is formed between r208 and h139 in prpc (mouse numbering). using an array of classic and elegant molecular and cellular experiments, the authors demonstrate that this r208–h139 ‘h-latch’ is necessary and sufficient to unleash the toxic effect of pom1. thus, the introduction of a r207a ‘latch-dead’ substitution abolishes toxicity to cerebellar organotypic cultured slices (cocs), whereas introduction of prp with an r207c–i138c constitutive latch leads to constitutive toxicity in the same culture model (fig. 1).a, upon binding to its specific epitope, the antibody pom1 forces a conformational change in prpc that involves a hydrogen bond between r208 and h139 (mouse numbering), referred to as an h-latch. conformational changes extend to the n-terminal flexible tail of prpc. b, a prpc mutant featuring a constitutive cys–cys latch in the same position is constitutively toxic. c,d, a mutation that impedes formation of the h-latch (c) or a modified pom1 that maintains its capacity to bind to prpc but is unable to induce the h-latch (d) result in abrogation of toxicity. e, in all cases, toxicity may or may not proceed through activation of the unfolded protein response (upr) and subsequent depletion of the pikfyve kinase, eventually resulting in vacuolation.the authors then evaluate the effect of ‘blunting’ pom1 by introducing mutations that do not alter its capacity to bind to prp but do eliminate its capacity to induce the h-latch (hcy104a). as expected, hcy104a is innocuous to prpc-expressing cocs, in contrast to the toxic wild-type pom1 reagent (fig. 1). moreover, the ‘latch-blunt’ antibody protects prpc-expressing cocs from the toxicity of exogenous prpsc, probably by occupying its binding site (fig. 2). finally, hcy104a is transduced to mice by intravenous injection of a neurotropic adeno-associated viral vector, and animals are subsequently infected with prions. all treated mice succumbed to prion disease, although hcy104a expression levels correlated positively with survival times2.a, interaction of prpsc with prpc is required for its toxicity to cerebellar organotypic cultured slices (cocs). b, in the presence of a latch-blunt antibody that is able to bind to prpc but not capable of inducing the h-latch, toxicity of prpsc to cocs is abrogated. c, in both cases, toxicity may or may not proceed through activation of the upr and subsequent depletion of the pikfyve kinase, eventually resulting in vacuolation.formation of the h-latch induces structural changes that affect distant portions of prpc, including its n-terminal flexible tail, as mapped by nmr (ref. 2). the flexible tail, which comprises about half of the sequence of prpc, has previously been shown to play a key role in the pathogenic cascade7. but what happens immediately after this global conformational switch is activated? previous studies from the same authors have shown that the proximal cause of prion or prion mimic-induced vacuolation is a depletion of pikfyve, caused in turn by activation of the unfolded protein response (upr) (refs. 7,8). therefore, is the h-latch-induced conformational alteration of prpc, perhaps of the flexible tail, sufficient to induce the upr? the nmr-based data show conformational changes throughout prpc that, nevertheless, do not alter its overall architecture. so, no extensive unfolding occurs, and a direct activation of the upr seems unlikely. indeed, when the prp containing the cys–cys constitutive latch was introduced in cocs, no changes in the upr were observed, despite conspicuous toxicity2. this suggests, as frontzek, bardelli and collaborators acknowledge, that the upr–pikfyve axis might not be the key mechanism of toxicity in their model. in such case, which is it? how is the h-latch-driven prpc conformational change transduced to eventually cause vacuolation and cell death, both in the model by fontzek, bardelli et al. and in vivo? these are intriguing questions that will without doubt be addressed soon.to what extent can these results be extrapolated to other protein misfolding-based neurodegenerative diseases? until very recently it was believed that prpsc was structurally very different from aβ, tau, or α-synuclein prionoids9. all these amyloids feature classic parallel in-register beta strand (piribs) stacks10. in contrast, prpsc was believed to be a 4-rung β-solenoid11. however, cryo-em studies have just revealed that prpsc is a piribs too, essentially similar to the aβ, tau, or α-synuclein propagative amyloids. it is the most parsimonious hypothesis, therefore, that aβ, tau, and α-synuclein amyloids might share at least some toxicity pathways with prpsc.might aβ, tau or α-synuclein early oligomers, deemed to be the toxic species in these diseases12, have a receptor akin to prpc? it is a tempting speculation. in fact, it has been proposed that prpc itself is that receptor13. these different neurodegenerative diseases share pathological hallmarks, but they also exhibit differential ones. a number of distinct mechanisms have been proposed, without definitive evidence for any of them1,12. the eventual definitive elucidation of the complete series of pathogenic events operating in prion disease, now at hand, will undoubtedly offer hints and suggest places to look to unveil the molecular mechanisms of other more prevalent and devastating neurodegenerative diseases.carlson, g. a. & prusiner, s. b. int. j. mol. sci. 22, 4861 (2021).cas article google scholar frontzek, k. et al. nat. struct. mol. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00814-7 (2022).article google scholar aguzzi, a. j. neurochem. 97, 1726–1739 (2006).cas article google scholar kraus, a. et al. mol. cell. 81, 4540–4551e6 (2021).cas article google scholar hoyt, h. et al. nat. commun. 13, 4005 (2022).cas article google scholar manka, s. w. et al. nat. commun. 13, 4004 (2022).cas article google scholar herrmann, u. s. et al. plos pathog. 11, e1004662 (2015).cas article google scholar lakkaraju, a. k. k. et al. embo mol. med. 13, e14714 (2021).cas article google scholar eraña, h. prion 13, 41–45 (2019).article google scholar sawaya, m. r., hughes, m. p., rodriguez, j. a., riek, r. & eisenberg, d. s. cell 184, 4857–4873 (2021).cas article google scholar spagnolli, g. et al. plos pathog. 15, e1007864 (2019).cas article google scholar ashe, k. h. alzheimers dement. 16, 1561–1567 (2020).article google scholar gunther, e. c. & strittmatter, s. m. j. mol. med. 88, 331–338 (2010).cas article google scholar download referencesj.r.r. is supported by the spanish ministry of science and innovation (grant pid2020-117465gb-i00, partially funded by eu funds).cimus biomedical research institute, university of santiago de compostela-idis, santiago de compostela, spainjesús r. requenayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jesús r. requena.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsrequena, j.r. unlatching a window into the molecular landscape of prion toxicity. nat struct mol biol 29, 733–735 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00817-4download citationpublished: 10 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00817-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 