catalytically active, self-propelled microrobots can trap and remove nanoplastics from water.you have full access to this article via your institution.in the environment, plastic and its particulate degradation products are found on land, in oceans, and increasingly in natural resources of potable water1. invisible to the naked eye, micro- and nanoplastics as pollutants have gained much attention due to their bioaccumulation and bioamplification2. so far, the attempts to remove nanoplastic by filtration have been ineffective. thus, a key goal is to offer scientifically sound and sustainable alternative solutions for the remediation of micro-and nanoplastic pollution. one attractive approach is the concept of deploying a swarm of microscopic self-propelled robots3,4. now, writing in nature communications5, urso et al. have reported on self-propelled light-powered magnetic microrobots that selectively capture and retrieve nanoplastic in water and allow their electrochemical detection.these microrobots are assembled from micro-scale exfoliated 2d sheets of titanium carbide, ti3c2tx or mxenes, a class of inorganic materials. the fabrication starts with a highly controlled thermal annealing process. this effectively leads to the formation of a multilayered titanium dioxide (tio2) microparticle with a high surface area, resembling a microscopic ‘accordion’ (fig. 1). then, following the selective coating of a thin layer of platinum (50 nm) on one side, to obtain a janus redox motor, the accordion is rendered with propulsion capabilities in water under incident ultraviolet light in a self-electrophoretic mechanism. this mechanism ingeniously exploits charge separation between the metal/semiconductor schottky junctions of the platinum/titanium dioxide (pt/tio2), where anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction occur at different rates on the multilayered janus microrobot. thus, a propulsive thrust is generated during the splitting of water that produces hydrogen (h2) and a proton concentration gradient (h+), establishing a local electric field. additionally, the microrobots are decorated with superparamagnetic nanoparticles to facilitate steerability and rapid sequestration in an applied external magnetic field. this multifunctionality combined with negative gravitaxis (directed movement away from the source of gravity) offers complete freedom of movement in space in an aquatic environment.in a series of proof-of-principle experiments, urso et al. demonstrate the on-the-fly capture between the multilayered slits of the microrobots of a nanoplastic model made of carboxylated polystyrene nanoparticles (50 nm in diameter). central to the capture of nanoplastic is the principle of ph-dependent electrostatic interaction between positively charged surfaces of the microrobot and the highly negatively carboxylated polystyrene. such ti3c2tx mxenes -derived microrobots, owing to their ph-dependent surface change tunability, may be of practical use in acidic aquatic ph to maximise the capture of negatively charged nanoplastic. in addition, by emulating real-world scenarios, urso et al. offer a road map for the on-site quantification of nanoplastics in the environment by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. regarding the sustainability and regeneration of the microrobots after mopping-up nanoplastics, the authors demonstrate a nanoplastic capture rate of>95% under acidic ph 3 which drops marginally after the fourth cycle of desorption at basic ph 11.although urso et al. chose polystyrene nanoparticles as representative models for nanoplastic, the results point towards a more general strategy regarding the feasibility of mxenes -derived microrobots for the capture and removal of plastic particulates, thanks to their versatility and functionalization possibilities. on this point, martin pumera, corresponding author of the article, says our microrobots can exploit the adsorbed light to move and, simultaneously, catalyse photochemical reactions, producing reactive oxygen species to break the polymer chains. therefore, in future studies, we will also investigate the photocatalytic degradation of nanoplastics and mineralise them into co2 and h2o.on the prospect of expanding the scope of mxene microrobots to remediate other pollutants, pumera is optimistic indeed, our microrobots can, in principle, adsorb various water contaminants simultaneously, including persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals, and pathogenic microorganisms, or be programmed to catch only a specific one. pumera plans to achieve the latter by molecular imprinting, where microrobots with cavities complementary to the target pollutant, will offer recognition of the desired selectivity.mitrano, d. m. & wohlleben, w. nat. commun. 11, 5324 (2020).cas article google scholar gigault, j. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 16, 501–507 (2021).cas article google scholar arqué, x. et al. chem. sci. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sc01806c (2022).article google scholar soto, f. et al. chem. rev. 122, 5 (2022).article google scholar urso, m. et al. nat. commun. 13, 3573 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesnature nanotechnology https://www.nature.com/nnanoraghavendra palankaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to raghavendra palankar.reprints and permissionspalankar, r. microrobots mop-up nanoplastics. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 821 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01199-wdownload citationpublished: 10 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01199-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 