cst is both an ssdna-binding complex and a dna pol-α/primase cofactor that coordinates the switch from g-strand elongation to c-strand fill-in during telomere maintenance. four papers in nature structural & molecular biology and nature provide transformative insights into cst activity, providing a platform to understand lagging-strand synthesis genome wide.you have full access to this article via your institution.the chromosomal ‘end replication’ problem is a critical one, with proper management of telomeres being required for dna integrity, and its misregulation associated with many human diseases. although much attention has been devoted to the extension of the longer g-strand by the enzyme telomerase, less has been given to the accompanying discontinuous replication of the c-rich strand by the lagging-strand dna replication machinery. the enzyme used for lagging-strand dna replication, a dna polymerase alpha/primase complex (pol-α/primase), synthesizes its own short rna, via its prim subunits, which it subsequently uses to prime dna polymerase activity using its pol subunits. although pol-α/primase is generally used for lagging-strand synthesis genome wide, it seems likely that its activities need to be customized for the particular challenges of telomere replication. four landmark new papers1,2,3,4 now provide significant and long-awaited discoveries into this vital process. together, through biochemical and structural approaches, their complementary discoveries reveal new insights into the general mechanism of activation of pol-α/primase and the coordination of lagging-strand synthesis with telomerase action.the natural erosion of chromosome ends is an obligatory result of the dna replication mechanism and is counteracted in most highly replicative cells by the action of telomerase. after telomerase constructs the g-rich strand, lagging-strand synthesis fills in the opposing c-rich strand. a breakthrough in understanding this lagging-strand synthesis process occurred in 2009, when a heterotrimeric protein complex, known to act as a dna replication factor and related to ssdna telomere-binding protein in yeast, was shown to act at telomeres5,6,7,8. subsequent studies found that this complex, known as cst for its constituent proteins ctc1, stn1 and ten1, preferentially bound g-rich single-stranded (ss) dna, could terminate telomerase action, participated in coordinating c-strand fill-in and had further functions in dna replication and repair of genome-wide for g-rich sequences9,10,11. the cellular importance of cst is underscored by the fact that mutations that disrupt its function cause rare telomere-based diseases, such as dyskeratosis congenita and coats plus syndrome; more recently, cst has also been pegged as a cancer target12,13. significant insights emerged from the structure of the full cst complex solved using cryo-em, including the identification of the dna anchor site and key interactions between the proteins, and cst’s striking resemblance to replication protein a14.since its initial discovery as a pol-α/primase replication factor, the details of how cst works with and activates pol-α/primase have been elusive. in a significant step toward this goal, zaug et al. now report the first in vitro reconstitution of c-strand telomere synthesis1. using endogenous pol-α/primase that serendipitously co-purified with cst, they show that cst powerfully stimulates pol-α/primase activity on telomeric dna. interestingly, the c-strand products gave a distinct 6-nt ladder of products much like those produced by telomerase. however, these products are due not to enzymatic dissociation but rather to the multiple initial binding sites synced to the g-binding preference of cst15. this characteristic banding pattern is evident in a similar assay with the fully recombinant proteins expressed in insect cells used by q. he et al.2. the zaug et al. reconstitution further shows that cst helps pol-α/primase overcome the replicative barrier that g-quadruplexes present in the g-rich telomere sequences1. overall, the reconstitution suggests that cst’s ability to act as a replication factor goes beyond the simple coordination of pol-α/primase binding to ssdna template and encompasses more sophisticated activities.the structural underpinnings of how cst orchestrates these activities are revealed in a series of papers that individually highlight different aspects of the process and together point to a coordinated mechanism of cst2,3,4. a central question surrounding cst–pol-α/primase is how the complexes are recruited to the telomere end to initiate c-strand fill-in. this step is addressed by a 4.6-å cryo-em structure from cai et al. of human cst in complex with pol-α/primase3. this structure reveals a complex in which cst docks against the c-terminal catalytic domain of pol-α/primase using a novel surface that encompasses the ob-c and ob-d domains of ctc1 (fig. 1a). there is not a significant change in conformation between the previously known free states of cst and pol-α/primase and their orientation in the bound complex, supporting the idea that this state, which was stabilized by chemical crosslinking, captures the recruitment conformation of the complex before enzymatic activation. importantly, a conserved structural element at the c-terminal recognition loop of the pola1 subunit of pol-α/primase and an elongated ob fold of ctc1 are key to the recruitment interaction, supporting a model in which cst and pol-α/primase coevolved in metazoans.color scheme: ctc1, yellow; stn1n, dark gray; stn1c, light gray; ten1, pale cyan; prim1, blue; prim2, green; pola1, purple; pola2, orange; ssdna, red. a, structure of the recruitment state for cst–pol-α/primase from the de lange lab (cai et al.)3. the pola1 c-terminal domain (ctd) binds ctc1’s extended ob-d via its ctd loop. in this structure the pola1 core is blocked by the pola1 ctd and prim2c. in this conformation, pol-α/primase binds below cst’s ssdna binding region. b, structure of active cst–pol-α/primase from the lim lab (q. he et al.)2. in the active conformation ctc1’s ob-g and stn1c bind the pola1 catalytic core, helping hold it in place, while ten1 acts as a lynchpin tethering the primase complex to cst. the scaffolded structure places primase and polymerase in the ideal positions for rna–dna handoff. c, structure of active cst–pol-α/primase in tetrahymena from the feigon lab (y. he et al.)4. much as in the human complex, stn1c binds the pola1 catalytic core, binding it to cst. figure adapted with permission from refs. 2,3,4 springer nature.a second set of structures of the same human cst–pol-α/primase complex, reported by q. he et al.2, reveals a similar cst platform with a dramatically different conformation of the pol-α/primase (fig. 1b). three structures, bound to different telomere overhang-mimicking oligonucleotides, were solved to 3.4- to 3.7-å resolution by cryo-em. relative to the free, inactive state of pol-α/primase16, seen in the recruitment structure, docking to cst triggers pol-α/primase to undergo a dramatic conformational change with entirely new interaction sites on the surface of cst. cst acts as a scaffold that partitions the dna polymerase and rna primase centers of the complex into two separate binding regions. the first region is where the primase portion is bound and stabilized by the stn1 n terminus (stn1n) and ten1 of the cst complex. the second is where the pola1 catalytic core is bound to cst via interactions with ctc1 ob-g and the stn1 c terminus (stn1c). the ctc1–stn1c–pola1 region assembles into a tunnel that points the 3′ end of the bound ssdna directly at the rna catalytic center of the primase subunit prim1. thus, these complexes appear to be in an enzymatically active state beautifully poised to add the primer nucleotide. therefore, the authors called them the preinitiation complex, or pic2. notably, the positioning of the primase and polymerase subunits by cst relative to the 5′-to-3′ orientation of ssdna creates the ideal geometry to increase the efficiency of rna–dna handoff once the priming reaction has occurred.a strength of cryo-em for studying flexible complexes is that conformational substates can be selected and reconstructed to reveal dynamic intermediates. q. he et al. filtered the conformationally heterogeneous particles for substates in which the primase domains prim1 and prim2c interact and identified a 4.3-å structure that represents an ‘advanced’ pre-initiation state2. this structure shows how the primase domain prim2c is crucial to help guide the 3′ end of the ssdna into the catalytic center of prim1, enabling rna primer synthesis to begin. here prim2c and prim1 interact to create a tunnel that guides the 3′ of the template to the catalytic core of the primase enzyme. this interaction is most likely transient because of prim2c’s flexibility, which could explain why rna primer synthesis is the rate-limiting step. this structure further demonstrates the importance of cst in helping to overcome this barrier, as not only does cst hold the template in place to help facilitate its initial binding by prim1 or prim2c, but its ten1 subunit also stabilizes prim1, making it easier for prim2c to bind. together, the biochemical study from zaug et al.1 and the structures from q. he et al.2 show that, besides guiding pol-α/primase to ssdna, cst is able to unfold dna secondary structures, such as g-quadruplexes, which would otherwise inhibit pol-α/primase action. these structures align well with the biochemical data from zaug et al. indicating that cst’s ability to activate pol-α/primase includes more than its ability to guide the enzyme to the ssdna template1. rather, they suggest cst acts as a more comprehensive and complex replication factor that plays several crucial roles in increasing pol-α/primase function at difficult-to-replicate g-rich portions of the genome.these significant insights into how cst recruits and activates pol-α/primase lead to a question: how does the cst stimulation of pol-α/primase coordinate with the termination of telomerase action? a recent biochemical study suggests that termination occurs through direct competition for the dna primer, raising the question of what mechanism underlies this switch17. insights into this step in the context of the tetrahymena thermophila proteins are revealed by structures from y. he et al. that resolve the telomerase ribonucleoprotein, cst and the catalytic subunit of pol-α/primase4 (fig. 1c). this study takes advantage of the propensity of the tetrahymena telomerase ribonucleoprotein to associate stably with auxiliary factors whose interactions are more transient in metazoans. thus, tetrahymena telomerase has been previously solved in complex with p50, the structural homolog of the shelterin component tpp118. in addition to the previously known ability of p50 (and human tpp1) to bind telomerase via its ob fold19,20,21, the structure reveals an unexpected interaction of residues in a c-terminal region of p50 with the first ob fold of tetrahymena cst, suggesting that p50 is a lynchpin in the coordination of g-strand and c-strand synthesis. the importance of this interaction is highlighted by the large conformational shift tetrahymena cst undergoes when binding to pol-α/primase, whereby cst no longer extensively interacts with telomerase but is tethered via a short peptide interaction holding the cst–pol-α/primase to p50. in this docked state, cst interacts with the catalytic domain of pol-α, where there appears to be a tunnel formed by the c termini of ctc1 and stn1 and the pola1 core guiding the ssdna.each of these studies provides an important piece of the telomere replication puzzle. first, it is clear that cst acts as a rigid scaffold upon which the other activities, such as g4 dissociation and coordination of pol-α/primase domains for primer synthesis and handoff, are built. human cst largely shows the same structural topology whether bound to pol-α/primase or not, whereas pol-α/primase is a rather dynamic complex, as evidenced by the various active and inactive conformations captured and the domains not observed due to their conformational heterogeneity. ironically, the importance of cst’s rigid topology highlights the importance of the highly dynamic domains of stn1c, prim2c and the catalytic core of pola1. in the inactive cst–pol-α/primase complex, stn1c was not resolved because of its conformational heterogeneity; but in the active state, stn1c helps capture the pola1 catalytic core along with ctc1 ob-g (p75 ob-c in tetrahymena), with all three creating a productive path for the ssdna (fig. 1). while prim2c is captured in the inactive state, partially blocking the pola1 catalytic core, it drastically changes positions to one where it can coordinate rna primer synthesis and primer handoff. the large conformational shift of pola1 from the inactive to active states not only moves the core away from potential inhibitory actions by the rest of the complex but also turns pola1’s own catalytic domain to face the prim1 catalytic center (fig. 1). finally, the surprising, unsung lynchpin of this process in humans is ten1, which binds the primase complex in multiple positions, stabilizing the scaffolded position of pol-α/primase that makes cst an exceptional replication factor for the enzyme. the ssdna feeding directly into prim1 in the human structure was not seen in tetrahymena, where the ssdna instead leads into pola1 (fig. 2a,b). ssdna interacts with a similar surface of hctc1 ob-g and tetrahymena p75/ctc1 ob-c, but the direction of its path at the 3′ end differs, so that it feeds into the different enzymes (fig. 2c,d). this could be simply because two separate and relevant states — before and after the switch from primase to polymerase activity — were captured in the human structures and tetrahymena structures, respectively.a, lim lab cst with prim1 and prim2 with ssdna (q. he et al.)2. ctc1, yellow; stn1, gray; ten1, pale cyan; prim1, blue; prim2, green; ssdna, red. the 5′ end of the single-stranded dna is bound to ctc1 and is threaded through a tunnel where the 3′ end sits in the primase enzyme. b, feigon lab cst with pola1 (y. he et al.)4. p75/ctc1, yellow; p45/stn1, gray; p19/ten1, pale cyan; pola1, pink; ssdna, blue. the 5′ end of the ssdna is bound to ctc1 and is threaded through a tunnel where the 3′ end sits in the pol-α enzyme. c, comparison of lim and feigon lab structures of ssdna binding interfaces. lim ctc1 ob-g, yellow; lim ssdna, red; feigon ssdna, blue; lim human stn1, gray. the ssdna binds across a similar surface of the c-terminal ob domain of ctc1/ctc1 with the 3′ end of the ssdna diverting paths. the human ssdna structure shows that stn1 participates in binding the ssdna, thereby feeding the ssdna to the active primase enzyme. d, lim and feigon lab structures of ssdna binding interfaces. feigon p75/ctc1 ob-c, yellow; lim ssdna, red; feigon ssdna, blue; feigon tetrahymena p45/stn1, gray. the tetrahymena p45/stn1 does not interact with ssdna. figure adapted with permission from refs. 2,4 springer nature.naturally, this set of papers raises as many questions as it answers. a big surprise is the lack of involvement of the n-terminal portion of ctc1 with the pol-α/primase complex. although this region is absent in the tetrahymena homolog, it is the region frequently mutated in coats plus syndrome, implicating it in a different and as yet unknown activity. tantalizing models may emerge regarding the switching between the recruitment and catalytically active states of the cst–pol-α/primase complex, as well as the handoff between primase and polymerase activities. the observation of a direct interaction between the tetrahymena p50 and cst raises the question of whether human tpp1, a component of shelterin, is likewise involved in switching off telomerase in human cells. finally, given the strong structural similarities of cst to replication protein a, these structures raise the questions of whether replication protein a has a similar role in assisting at other points in the genomes and whether cst’s particular abilities explain its presence at other g-rich patches in the genome10. the remarkable advances in our understanding of dna replication that these papers provide will undoubtably trigger greater mechanistic and biomedical insights in the near future. it is exciting to see the telomere ‘ends’ leading the way!zaug, a. j., goodrich, k. j., song, j. j., sullivan, a. e. & cech, t. c. nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04930-8 (2022).article pubmed google scholar he, q. et al. nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05040-1 (2022).cai, s. w. et al. nat. struct. mol. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00766-y (2022).article pubmed google scholar he, y. et al. nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04931-7 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar linger, b. r. & price, c. m. crit. rev. biochem. mol. biol. 44, 434–446 (2010).article google scholar miyake, y. et al. mol. cell 36, 193–206 (2009).cas article google scholar surovtseva, y. v. et al. mol. cell 36, 207–218 (2009).cas article google scholar castell, d. e. et al. j. biol. chem. 284, 5807–5818 (2009).article google scholar chen, l. y., redon, s. & lingner, j. nature 488, 540–544 (2012).cas article google scholar chastain, m. et al. cell rep. 16, 1300–1314 (2016).cas article google scholar wang, f. et al. cell rep. 2, 1096–1103 (2012).cas article google scholar lim, c. j. & cech, t. r. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 22, 283–298 (2021).cas article google scholar mirman, z. et al. nature 560, 112–116 (2018).cas article google scholar lim, c. j. et al. science 368, 1081–1085 (2020).cas article google scholar hom, r. a. & wuttke, d. s. biochemistry 56, 4210–4218 (2017).cas article google scholar baranovskiy, a. g. et al. j. biol. chem. 291, 10006–10020 (2016).cas article google scholar zaug, a. j. et al. nucleic acids res. 49, 11653–11665 (2021).cas article google scholar he, y. et al. nature 593, 454–459 (2021).cas article google scholar zhong, f. l. et al. cell 150, 481–494 (2012).cas article google scholar nandakumar, j. et al. nature 492, 285–289 (2012).cas article google scholar sexton, a. n., youmans, t. d. & collins, k. j. biol. chem. 287, 34455–34464 (2012).cas article google scholar download referencesresearch in the laboratory of d.s.w. is funded by the us national institutes of health (nih; gm139274), and a.t.b. is supported by a fellowship provided by the nih–university of colorado boulder (t32gm008759).department of biochemistry, university of colorado boulder, boulder, co, usaconner l. olson, alexandra t. barbour & deborah s. wuttkeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to deborah s. wuttke.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsolson, c.l., barbour, a.t. & wuttke, d.s. filling in the blanks: how the c-strand catches up to the g-strand at replicating telomeres using cst. nat struct mol biol 29, 730–733 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00818-3download citationpublished: 10 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00818-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 