optical fibres can now directly generate a variety of bessel beams thanks to custom-designed, intricate 3d-printed structures applied to their tips.you have full access to this article via your institution.structured light refers to light beams that look very different from the usual visual picture that one holds of a conventional laser beam of a narrow spot with a smooth, continuous gaussian-shaped transverse intensity profile.for example, take the family of bessel beams. these beams are eigensolutions of the helmoltz equations without any paraxial approximation that typically feature oscillatory intensity patterns resembling a bullseye. as higher order solutions of propagating light fields in free space, bulk media and optical fibres, bessel beams possess intriguing properties not typically found in conventional gaussian beams.a second type of interesting structured light is those whose phase or polarization-orientation varies in the transverse azimuthal direction with respect to the direction of beam propagation, yielding a beam possessing non-zero orbital angular momentum (oam). the amount of oam carried by a beam is dictated by its order or topological charge value which describes the level of its spiral phase twist. the combination of both of these beam types can lead to more exotic solutions such as bessel beams that carry oam.such singular beams have found varied applications on account of the fact that bessel beams are, by their nature, diffraction resistant, as described in the seminal paper by durnin et al1, which has yielded fundamental implications for the field of microscopy. on the other hand, light carrying oam does so down to the single-photon level, with implications for fields as disparate as quantum optics and telecommunications, tweezing and micromachining2.given the widespread interest in structured light beams, researchers have invested considerable efforts at developing a variety of techniques, methodologies and devices to generate them. of keen interest is to realize optical-fibre-based generation since that would enable remote delivery of such beams to environments not especially suitable for bulk devices, such as within living organisms via endoscopy, or in cold-atom chambers.this is exactly what has been achieved by the group of carlo liberale at the king abdullah university of science and technology (kaust) in saudi arabia who have now reported the use of 3d-printed nanostructures on the tip of an optical fibre to create bessel beams of various orders3.fibre-based generation of bessel as well as oam beams has been accomplished before, but with limitations, in particular with respect to the order of the beam and its amount of oam. for example, conventional long-period fibre gratings can coherently convert, with negligible losses and in an achromatic fashion, an incoming gaussian-shaped fundamental mode of a fibre into the desired eigenmode with the preferred spatial characteristics4. however, these techniques have been limited by the fact that grating couplers cannot impart high values of oam and, so far, beams with topological charges of up to only 2 have typically been possible in an all-fibre format5. other options include preferentially etching the fibre facet6 or depositing metasurface structures7 on the fibre tip in order to emulate well-known free-space elements such as axicons, spiral phase plates or q-plates that generate structured light. however, these techniques do not allow exploiting the full range of phase modulation in combination with beam propagation degrees of freedom available in bulk formats.this general problem, of developing complex optical structures at fibre facets to enable remote delivery of structured light beams, has now been elegantly solved by exploiting recent advances in nanoscale 3d-printing, a technique that is now mature enough to be available as commercial tools8. two recent papers in particular have reported remarkable advances in the field. lightman et al9. have successfully developed a miniaturized version of the well-known oam mode sorter on a fibre facet such that fibre-based multiplexing of oam beams can now be envisaged, offering a route to expand the data transmission capacity of optical fibre communications.reddy et al3. have not only 3d printed bulk-optical elements onto a fibre facet (see fig. 1), but also succeeded in integrating them with 3d-printed tapered fibre structures that realize crucial optical transformations not readily feasible with bulk-optic elements. this provides versatility in design, making it possible for a simple customized optical fibre to generate bessel beams carrying oam with a topological charge value as high as 20.carlo liberalea, spiral phase plate structure used to transform gaussian beam to annular beam. b, additional microlens and its supports added to a to create the final bessel beams.there are well known bulk-optical elements available to do this, which reddy et al. have miniaturized via 3d-printing. but obtaining beams with well-defined free-space propagation characteristics also requires control of the input beam to which optical transformations are applied. for instance, a common technique for generating bessel beams entails either spatially fourier transforming an annular beam or introducing an axicon in the beam path of a gaussian beam. in both techniques the resultant centre spot size of the bessel beam, and hence its diffraction-free range, strongly depends on the input (annular or gaussian) beam size.the highly versatile design methodology used by reddy et al. involves making use of an intermediary 3d-printed tapered fibre structure to adiabatically transform the original gaussian beam in the fibre into an annular beam of user-defined size and ring width.this crucial step then allows the use of miniaturized versions of other optical elements (lenses and spiral phase plates, in particular) to achieve bessel beams of desired size, diffraction characteristics and topological charges. thus, reddy et al. demonstrate a significant advance as to how the emerging technology of 3d-printing can be put to good use in fibre optics. it combines two previously demonstrated functionalities of this technology — the ability to design user-defined fibre structures, and the ability to miniaturize well-known bulk optical elements — to achieve user-defined structured light beams.while this advance is expected to benefit several applications where remote delivery of structured light beams is of interest, it may also provide solutions for improved interfacing with other speciality fibres, such as ring-core fibres10 that have been shown to enable high-capacity fibre communications using the oam degree of freedom for data channel multiplexing. to be useful as an interface for oam-based fibre communications, however, the device functionality may have to extend to mode multiplexing (that is, mapping several incoming modes into other modes) rather than just mode conversion (that is, mapping one incoming mode to one outgoing mode). but this may well be feasible by combining the multiplexing capabilities shown by lightman et al. with the methodology implemented by reddy et al.for practical use, either as an interface for oam communications or for the aforementioned remote delivery applications, the technology may have to develop further in terms of mode purity. current results suggest that a significant fraction of the optical power may reside in adjacent oam mode orders. desired purity levels for communications applications are orders of magnitude higher (>95%, often >99% needed), but there may be remote micromanipulation or remote imaging applications that are more tolerant in this regard. another question that arises is how well the device may handle high laser powers, given that the 3d-printed structures comprise polymer materials. as reddy et al. mention, current efforts at developing versatile 3d-printing of glass would be an exciting development to transition this technology to a materials system known to have low optical loss and be more power tolerant.finally, an interesting question worth exploring would be related to the manufacturability and yield of these devices. the structures demonstrated by lightman et al. and reddy et al. represent significant engineering feats since the entire complex 3d devices must be precisely aligned. the robustness of this alignment procedure will likely impact the yield of devices and their performance, especially in the case of mass production.durnin, j., miceli, j. j. & eberly, j. h. phys. rev. lett. 58, 1499–1501 (1987).ads article google scholar yao, a. m. & padgett, m. j. adv. opt. photon. 3, 161–204 (2011).article google scholar reddy, i. v. a. k., bertoncini, a. & liberale, c. optica 9, 645–651 (2022).ads article google scholar nicholson, j. w. et al. opt. express 18, 17651–17657 (2010).ads article google scholar zhang, w. et al. opt. lett. 41, 5082–5085 (2016).ads article google scholar eah, s. k., jhe, w. & arakawa, y. rev. sci. instrum. 74, 4969–4971 (2003).ads article google scholar devlin, r. c., ambrosio, a., rubin, n. a., mueller, j. p. b. & capasso, f. science 358, 896–900 (2017).ads mathscinet article google scholar nano scribe; https://www.nanoscribe.com/ (2022).lightman, s. et al. opt. lett. 47, 3491–3494 (2022).ads article google scholar ramachandran, s., gregg, p., kristensen, p. & golowich, s. e. opt. exp. 23, 3721–3730 (2015).article google scholar download referencesboston university, boston, ma, usasiddharth ramachandranyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to siddharth ramachandran.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsramachandran, s. 3d-printing yields structured light. nat. photon. 16, 618–619 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01070-3download citationpublished: 17 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01070-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 