chronic kidney disease (ckd) is often well advanced before it is detected. although polygenic scores may enable the early stratification of patients at risk of ckd, the transferability of polygenic scores for the prediction of ckd to populations of non-european ancestry was limited. a new cross-ancestry polygenic score for ckd overcomes these issues, demonstrating good performance across ancestries.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to khan, a. et al. genome-wide polygenic score to predict chronic kidney disease across ancestries. nat. med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01869-1 (2022).chronic kidney disease (ckd) represents a health burden that affects 10–15% of the adult population globally1. however, serum creatinine only starts to rise when 50% of the kidneys’ filtration function is lost, and thus ckd is often well advanced before it is detected. the ability to identify individuals at high risk of developing ckd could facilitate the early detection of ckd and potentially prevent its complications and progression to kidney failure. polygenic scores (pgs) offer a potential approach for risk stratification: they are based on genetic information that is present from conception and reflect a lifelong predisposition to a given disease. well-performing pgs have been reported for many complex diseases2. these aggregate the often small effects of hundreds to millions of common genetic variants by adding the number of risk alleles weighted by their effects on disease risk as determined by genome-wide association studies (gwas) (fig. 1). such pgs can be used, for example, to study its association with a disease, to estimate an individual’s risk of disease, or to inform the planning of procedures, such as kidney transplantation. various methods exist for the selection of variants into pgs. however, pgs often lack external validation and demonstrate limited transferability between populations, especially to populations of different ancestries to that from which the pgs was derived3. european-ancestry populations remain over-represented in gwas, leading to poor performance of resulting pgs in populations of other ancestries and thereby potentially increasing disparities in health care. now, however, khan et al.4 describe the development of a genome-wide pgs for moderate to advanced ckd, defined as stage g3 or greater, in ancestrally diverse populations. its validation in numerous external datasets suggests that the pgs could be used as a tool to identify patients at high risk of ckd across a range of ancestries.a | selection of variants of interest on the basis of an independent genome-wide association study (gwas). these may have small or large effect sizes. b | calculation of the polygenic score in an individual of interest as the weighted sum of allele dosages of the variants selected in a. an allele dosage is the estimated number of copies of a risk allele. c | interpretation of the result in b in the context of the study population. egfr, estimated glomerular filtration rate.the pgs could be used as a tool to identify patients at high risk of ckd across a range of ancestriesthe pgs developed by khan et al. was developed in line with clingen standards5 and was optimized and validated for individual-level risk prediction of ckd in a three-step design. the researchers first developed 19 candidate pgs using a state-of-the-art procedure based on summary statistics from a large meta-analysis of gwas of estimated glomerular filtration rate by the ckdgen consortium6. they then used an independent subsample of european-ancestry uk biobank participants to select the best-performing candidate pgs. the performance of their pgs in individuals of diverse ancestries was optimized during these first two steps by applying a pan-ancestry linkage disequilibrium reference and by incorporating information on the presence of apol1 high-risk genotypes. the combination of polygenic background and individual high-risk variants has previously been shown to improve disease prediction for other diseases7. third, the researchers tested the best pgs in 15 independent cohorts of different ancestries.the authors found that the pgs was transferable across ancestries, with consistent performance in studies with persons of african, latinx, asian and european ancestries. across all 15 studies, the area under the curve, indicative of the discriminative ability of the pgs, was 81%, and the odds ratio of ckd per unit higher pgs was 1.44, meaning that each unit higher pgs increases the chance that an individual will have ckd by 44%. the odds ratio of ckd was >3 when comparing persons in the top 2% tail of the pgs distribution with all other individuals, which is of similar magnitude as a positive family history of ckd. these findings are in line with those of a previous study, which reported odds ratios of comparable magnitudes when comparing individuals in tails of pgs distributions for several cardiometabolic diseases, inflammatory bowel disease and breast cancer to all individuals in the remainder of the respective distributions8. khan et al. could not investigate whether the pgs acts independent of a positive family history — a knowledge gap that should be filled in future studies.another major finding of the study is that apol1 risk genotypes in a recessive model conveyed a risk of ckd in individuals of african and latinx admixed ancestry of similar magnitude to that associated with a 1-unit increase in the pgs. moreover, inclusion of apol1 risk genotype information into the pgs led to a substantial improvement in ckd prediction among persons in the top 2% tail of the pgs, with no decline in performance in the cohorts of other ancestries. lastly, pgs and apol1 risk genotypes led to additive increases in risk without evidence of interaction, although this finding requires reassessment as new multi-ancestry pgs are developed.lastly, the authors developed two continuous ancestry-adjustment methods to derive a standardized cross-ancestry score that enables easy implementation of the pgs into clinical practice, since ancestry-specific distributions are not necessary. they conducted extensive sensitivity analyses, which demonstrated robust performance of the pgs with different equations for estimating glomerular filtration rate and different definitions of ancestry. comparison of this pgs to one from yu et al.9 that did not include the apol1 risk genotypes and was not ancestry-optimized showed that the score from yu et al. performed slightly better in individuals of european ancestry but worse among those of african and asian ancestry. this expected finding emphasizes the importance of developing pgs that can be applied across ancestries with respect to their inclusion in patient care.one strength of this study is its rigorous methodological focus to improve multi-ancestry performance by using a trans-ethnic linkage disequilibrium reference panel and by including apol1 risk genotype information. however, despite these efforts, tail discrimination was lower in participants of african ancestry than for other evaluated ancestries, most likely a result of the continued under-representation of non-european populations in the underlying gwas and the smaller number of individuals available for score optimization. in addition, while efforts to enable prediction of existing ckd are important, tools with which to predict ckd progression is another area of particular interest, given its variable course. it will be of interest to address this point in cohorts of patients with ckd, with efforts from our group and others underway. in summary, the work by khan et al. represents an important addition to the nephrology literature as it shows that pgs can predict ckd across ancestries, with the potential to identify individuals at particularly high risk before the onset of symptoms. in the future, this work may enable better focusing of preventive efforts and screening, and be useful to refine risks around kidney transplantation for donors as well as recipients.eckardt, k. u. et al. evolving importance of kidney disease: from subspecialty to global health burden. lancet 382, 158–169 (2013).article google scholar lambert, s. a. et al. the polygenic score catalog as an open database for reproducibility and systematic evaluation. nat. genet. 53, 420–425 (2021).cas article google scholar martin, a. r. et al. clinical use of current polygenic risk scores may exacerbate health disparities. nat. genet. 51, 584–591 (2019).cas article google scholar khan, a. et al. genome-wide polygenic score to predict chronic kidney disease across ancestries. nat. med. 28, 1412–1420 (2022).cas article google scholar wand, h. et al. improving reporting standards for polygenic scores in risk prediction studies. nature 591, 211–219 (2021).cas article google scholar wuttke, m. et al. a catalog of genetic loci associated with kidney function from analyses of a million individuals. nat. genet. 51, 957–972 (2019).cas article google scholar fahed, a. c. et al. polygenic background modifies penetrance of monogenic variants for tier 1 genomic conditions. nat. commun. 11, 3635 (2020).cas article google scholar khera, a. v. et al. genome-wide polygenic scores for common diseases identify individuals with risk equivalent to monogenic mutations. nat. genet. 50, 1219–1224 (2018).cas article google scholar yu, z. et al. polygenic risk scores for kidney function and their associations with circulating proteome, and incident kidney diseases. j. am. soc. nephrol. https://doi.org/10.1681/asn.2020111599 (2021).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar download referencesthe work of a.k. was supported by german research foundation (dfg) project id 431984000-sfb 1453.institute of genetic epidemiology, department of data driven medicine, faculty of medicine and medical center–university of freiburg, freiburg, germanyinga steinbrenner & anna köttgenyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to anna köttgen.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssteinbrenner, i., köttgen, a. a polygenic score predicts ckd across ancestries. nat rev nephrol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-022-00622-8download citationpublished: 11 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-022-00622-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 