tardigrades are everywhere. they’re tiny — usually under a millimeter long — and they’re mostly transparent, so they’re easy to miss. but you probably walk by them every day. we’ve been grooming them as emerging models for studying how body forms evolve and how biological materials can survive extreme conditions.you have full access to this article via your institution.tardigrades are one of nature’s superheroes. dry them out and they can remain in lifeless, suspended animation for decades until they’re given water again. this ability is common in plant seeds and fungal spores, but very few animals can survive desiccation1,2. once dried, tardigrades can survive remarkable extremes. some tardigrade species can withstand temperatures from nearly absolute zero to above boiling temperature and a range of exceptionally low or high pressures. some have survived a trip on a rocket exposed to the vacuum of space for days. and whether wet or dry, they can survive radiation doses about 1,000 times greater than we humans can.i first encountered tardigrades in a college course on animal diversity, and i developed an obsession with them later, starting in 1997. that’s when a paper by anna maria aguinaldo and colleagues demonstrated that two of biology’s best model organisms — caenorhabditis elegans and drosophila — are much more closely related to each other than scientists had thought3. i figured that among the other animals in this newly recognized grouping, it might be possible to develop some great future models for answering questions in comparative biology.six phyla of animals are close relatives of the phyla that contain c. elegans and drosophila, including tardigrades (fig. 1), but no animals in these six phyla had been widely used in labs. so tools for modern molecular study were meager. i chose a tardigrade species that appeared well suited for microscopy — it has small, clear embryos and is transparent throughout its life cycle — and that was likely to have a compact genome4. an amateur scientist in england had already developed reliable methods to culture the animals, as he had been growing them in his shed for over a decade, and he generously shared his culture methods5. only five genes were represented in genbank at the time for the entire tardigrade phylum, but another lab was beginning to collect thousands of sequences5,6. we began to describe the animals’ development. and we established, for the first time for the phylum, some needed protocols — protocols for immunostaining, in situ hybridization, live microscopy of fluorescent markers, microinjection of animals, rna interference, and methods for identifying protectants that enable the animals’ remarkable desiccation tolerance7. the species we chose was recognized recently as a previously unnamed species in the genus hypsibius and hence was dubbed hypsibius exemplaris, for ‘exemplar’ or ‘model’ species8 (fig. 2).based on ref. 19 but with nematomorphs added in their usual position. drosophila image adapted with permission from hannah davis, 2019 ccby-sa 4.0 (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/file:standing_female_drosophila_melanogaster.jpg); tardigrade illustration by anya broverman-wray, 2013.the animal is about 200 µm long. it is shown next to algae and with ingested algae inside its stomach.over a thousand species of tardigrades have been described to date9, and they all share a similar body plan: a head bearing an endearing pair of dark eyespots, and four pairs of legs, on a body that’s typically less than a millimeter long. like many animals, tardigrades have a tube-within-a-tube organization; that is, a digestive tube running through the middle of an epidermal tube. between these two tubes is a fluid-filled region that contains their brain and ganglia, a gonad, hundreds of free-floating cells, and muscle cells that criss-cross the body and enable the eight-legged water-balloons to walk.to understand how this stubby body form arose, we’ve examined expression patterns for genes that can help inform what parts of modern animals’ bodies derived from common parts of their ancestors’ bodies10. we found hox gene expression patterns that suggested that the tardigrade body plan is likely to have originated when a mutation in an ancestral animal caused the deletion of a large part of the animal’s body: the expression patterns suggested that almost the entire body of a tardigrade — its head and its first three pairs of legs — is homologous to just the head of arthropods such as drosophila. and the remainder of the body, where the last pair of legs form, shares homology with the very posterior end of a drosophila abdomen. the parts that would correspond to drosophila’s entire thorax and nearly their entire abdomen, along with the hox genes that would specify that large region, have been lost in tardigrades.it’s possible that this compact body plan helps tardigrades to telescope down to an even more compact form during desiccation, a form known as a tun. and their ability to survive desiccation might have predisposed the animals to survive other extreme conditions. the extreme conditions that tardigrades can survive include some conditions that would kill most animals. indeed, some of these conditions should destroy even the things that animals are made of — for example cells, membranes, dna, rna and proteins. this suggested to us that tardigrades must make protectants, and probably lots of different kinds of protectants for different kinds of molecules and for different compartments of cells. tardigrades might also harbor some exceptional repair mechanisms. such protectants and repair mechanisms would be fascinating to understand, and they might additionally suggest valuable new routes toward protecting fragile biomedical products such as medicines and vaccines. if these fragile materials could be made to survive desiccation at room temperature as well as tardigrades can, this could dramatically improve how effectively such medicines and vaccines could be distributed and used.recent work on tardigrades has identified several protectants that are beginning to explain some tardigrade superpowers. for example, research by other labs on the tardigrade species ramazzottius varieornatus has identified a tardigrade protein that coats dna and protects it from ionizing radiation11. when this protein was expressed in human cultured cells, the cells were protected from damaging x-ray irradiation. our lab has found that genes encoding intrinsically disordered proteins in h. exemplaris are upregulated in response to desiccation and are important for the tardigrades to survive desiccation11,12. expressing some of these genes in bacterial or yeast cells can enhance desiccation tolerance in these cells. how the identified protectants function is the subject of ongoing work11,12,13,14.tardigrades are well poised to continue to help us to answer interesting questions about how body forms evolve, taking advantage of c. elegans and drosophila as comparative models, and about how living materials can be made to survive some remarkable extremes. although the experimental tools and resources for tardigrades have grown in recent years, some important ones have yet to be developed. genome sequences for h. exemplaris and r. varieornatus are fairly complete15 but not yet as well assembled as are those for c. elegans or drosophila. and rna interference works for disrupting gene functions16, but there are not yet methods for making transgenic or crispr gene-edited tardigrade lines. as a result, some of the inferences about tardigrade gene function to date have relied on heterologous expression of genes rather than disruption of in vivo functions. still, the use of existing tools and resources has enabled a tardigrade experimental community to grow, which bodes well for expanding the methods available for answering questions of interest. the kuneida lab recently reported the first success using crispr in tardigrades, to delete sequences from somatic cells17.tardigrades are one example among a growing roster of emerging model organisms that have flourished in labs in recent years18. modern techniques that work in almost any organism, such as transcriptomics, have allowed scientists to answer questions that could not be answered using traditional model organisms — or indeed to revisit questions that were largely forgotten to be interesting or broadly relevant.rebecchi, l., boschetti, c. & nelson, d. r. hydrobiologia 847, 2779–2799 (2020).article google scholar hibshman, j. d., clegg, j. s. & goldstein, b. front. physiol. 11, 592016 (2020).article google scholar aguinaldo, a. m. et al. nature 387, 489–493 (1997).cas article google scholar goldstein, b. in emerging model systems in developmental biology (eds. goldstein, b. & srivastava, m.) 173–198 (academic, 2022).mcnuff, r. cold spring harb. protoc. https://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot102319 (2018).blaxter, m., elsworth, b. & daub, j. proc. r. soc. lond. b 271(suppl. 4), s189–s192 (2004).cas google scholar goldstein, b. cold spring harb. protoc. https://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.emo102301 (2018).gąsiorek, p., stec, d., morek, w. & michalczyk, ł. zootaxa 4415, 45–75 (2018).article google scholar degma, p., bertolani, r. & guidetti, r. actual checklist of tardigrada species https://doi.org/10.25431/11380_1178608 (2021).smith, f. w. et al. curr. biol. 26, 224–229 (2016).cas article google scholar hashimoto, t. et al. nat. commun. 7, 12808 (2016).cas article google scholar boothby, t. c. et al. mol. cell 65, 975–984.e5 (2017).cas article google scholar crilly, c. j., brom, j. a., warmuth, o., esterly, h. j. & pielak, g. j. protein sci. 31, 396–406 (2022).cas article google scholar hesgrove, c. & boothby, t. c. cell commun. signal. 18, 178 (2020).cas article google scholar arakawa, k. annu. rev. anim. biosci. 10, 17–37 (2022).article google scholar tenlen, j. r., mccaskill, s. & goldstein, b. dev. genes evol. 223, 171–181 (2013).cas article google scholar kumagai, h., kondo, k. & kunieda, t. biochem. biophys. res. commun. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.07.060 (2022).goldstein, b. & srivastava, m. (eds.) emerging model systems in developmental biology (academic, 2022).laumer, c. e. et al. proc. r. soc. lond. b 286, 20190831 (2019).cas google scholar download referencesi thank current and former members of my lab, and colleagues, for their work and their intellectual contributions, and the national science foundation including current nsf grant ios 2028860 for long-term support for our research on tardigrades.department of biology and lineberger comprehensive cancer center, university of north carolina at chapel hill, chapel hill, nc, usabob goldsteinyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to bob goldstein.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsgoldstein, b. tardigrades. nat methods 19, 904–905 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01573-5download citationpublished: 04 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01573-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 