floods and droughts seem to be occurring with increasing frequency and severity, pushing the limits of society’s ability to prepare for these extreme events through prediction and effective adaptation. we would like to believe that we learn from each disaster, and are thus better adapted to handle the next one. but is this really the case? in a paper in nature, kreibich et al.1 examine 45 places where an extreme flood or drought happened twice, and determine whether risk-management strategies successfully reduced the impact of the second disaster. the authors’ analysis suggests that adaptation is nearly always limited, and that the impact of a second event is not reduced by risk-management strategies when the event is more extreme than the first one. read the paper: the challenge of unprecedented floods and droughts in risk managementkreibich and her 91 co-authors from around the world documented 26 pairs of floods and 19 pairs of drought events occurring between 1947 and 2019 — with each pair having occurred in the same area. they compared the two events of each pair in the following ways: the severity of the hazard; the population’s exposure (who or what were in harm’s way) and vulnerability (the ability to cope with the disaster); the risk-management strategies in place (such as early-warning systems, reservoirs or levee construction); and the impact of the event (deaths and economic damage). their extensive documentation and classification of each pair of events in terms of these factors has generated a valuable data set of the change in flood and drought impacts across time; this is now publicly available for further analysis. to ensure reliability, each event was classified by multiple scientists, including those familiar with the region in each case.the authors’ research shows that the impact of the second drought or flood was less than that of the first in 20 of the 45 cases. but in all but 2 of these 20 cases, the second hazard was no more severe than the first, and the vulnerability of the population had decreased. in the 13 cases in which the impact of the second event was higher than that of the first, 12 had an increase in exposure relative to the first event, despite showing reduced vulnerability and improvements in risk management in many cases. in the remaining 12 cases, the impact of the two events was the same.the most alarming finding of the study is that the impact of the second drought or flood was larger than that of the first in all but two cases in which it was the more extreme event — no matter how much risk management had been undertaken, or to what extent exposure and vulnerability had been reduced. the results imply that investments in managing risk and curbing vulnerability following one severe event might not make a society sufficiently adaptive to reduce the risk from unprecedented subsequent events, which are increasing in a changing climate.exposure and vulnerability are inextricably linked2. it is well established that populations that are exposed to droughts and floods — often by necessity, as a last resort and through no choice of their own — are also especially vulnerable to these events3 (fig. 1). this means that investing in risk management alone, by improving flood early-warning systems, for example, won’t substantially reduce flood fatalities and damage if people continue to settle in floodplains. managing flood risk by constructing levees, or drought risk by expanding irrigation infrastructure, can also backfire, because these developments incentivize people to settle in floodplains or start new agricultural activities in drought-prone areas.figure 1 | the impact of flooding in careiro da várzea, brazil, in may 2022.credit: bruno kelly/reuterskreibich et al. also found that, unlike in cases of flooding, reducing vulnerability to drought through improved early-warning systems and aid does not necessarily decrease the impact of drought. these findings echo a previous drought-vulnerability study in ceará, brazil, in which researchers found that drought-management policies can create incentives that reduce a population’s willingness or desire to adapt to disaster4. furthermore, if individual landowners are not incentivized to make private investments in risk management, improving institutional-level risk-management strategies might be less effective5. the fraction of the global population at risk of floods is growingunfortunately, exposure is increasing, especially for floods6, and this trend is expected to drive future increases in fatalities and damage as a result of flooding7. this means that, regardless of whether the changing climate increases the number of hazards, the impact of these hazards will increase if we do not directly tackle the socio-economic drivers that are putting human settlements and activities in harm’s way.although kreibich et al. focused on cases in which people adapted after a disaster, a study of 549 cities, reported earlier this year, showed that disasters do not catalyse urban adaptation8. indeed, there is little evidence that adaptation ever offers more than incremental action to effectively reduce risk9. effective and sustainable adaptation requires that we address the underlying social-economic conditions that are responsible for differences in exposure and vulnerability10. for example, the discriminatory practice known as redlining, in which financial services were withheld from communities of colour in the united states — intentionally excluding them from access to capital investment — has led to inadequate flood-mitigation infrastructure in these communities and increased exposure to disaster (see go.nature.com/3cpp3mz).racism also underpins inequitable flood-recovery processes elsewhere in the united states, including in the rio grande valley in south texas, where exclusion from federal recovery funds compels residents to rely on predatory loans that can worsen their poverty11. adaptation strategies that reduce the impact of disaster in a changing climate must address the political processes that incentivize development patterns12 and recovery processes that further entrench vulnerability and exposure. extreme rainfall slows the global economyreducing exposure is essential, but must be managed equitably. who gets moved, and how, matters. effective relocation of communities whose members’ livelihoods are no longer viable as a result of repeated floods or droughts, a practice known as managed retreat, can occur with planning, participation of residents who might need to move, and careful design13. unmanaged retreat — or forced climate migration — can perpetuate vulnerability and inequality. there is always a danger that pre-existing social inequities will be replicated and reinforced through adaptation. in facing these challenges, it is not risk management that is needed, but rather transformation, a concept embraced by the growing number of climate-justice activists and researchers14, as well as by the intergovernmental panel on climate change in this year’s report on impacts, adaptation and vulnerability15.kreibich and colleagues’ work gives some indication of what a transformative adaptation agenda should include. there is an urgent need to correct the underlying socio-political inequities that increase vulnerability and exposure. those responsible for managing risk must also do more than learn from the past, but should rather anticipate and adapt to the prospect of an increasingly hazardous future. transformative approaches to adaptation will undoubtedly be politically fraught, complex and time consuming. as we confront and overcome the social and financial barriers to such adaptation, we must also acknowledge the limits of adaptation, and manage the inequitable distribution of damage that cannot be avoided through adaptation in a changed climate.a suite of actions — from expanding access to climate insurance16 to financing support for developing countries that experience irreversible loss and damage17 — has been proposed to deal with the limits of adaptation. yet loss and damage financing was not included on the official agenda for this november’s cop 27 meeting, the most important forum for global governance agreements on climate change (see go.nature.com/32dmura). kreibich and colleagues’ work adds to the mounting evidence that transformative adaptive pathways9 are needed — and needed now. the hope is that this evidence will soon raise global recognition of the fact that unprecedented hazards require unprecedented adaptation.