metal ions such as zinc are essential for proper cell function. at least 10% of human proteins contain zinc as a cofactor11, and zinc(ii) ions need to be correctly allocated to these proteins to prevent mismetallation of other proteins. however, the identity of proteins that could allocate zinc ions to the appropriate targets has been a mystery. two groups — one writing in cell2 and the other in cell reports3 — now identify one such protein.zinc is ingested as a key micronutrient in human diets. given that about 20% of people globally are at risk of not receiving enough zinc4, a key question in the field of metallobiology has been how zinc ions are allocated when the micronutrient is scarce. are the proteins that most need zinc ions served first — and, if so, do zinc-chaperone molecules exist for the purpose of prioritizing these proteins? levels of copper(i) ions are generally low in cells, and metallochaperones have been shown5 to acquire enough copper ions to safeguard them for transfer to client proteins. but although this process is feasible for a limited number of copper proteins, the large number of zinc proteins makes it unlikely that zinc ions could be transferred to all of these proteins in the same way. mapping micronutrients in grain and soil unearths hidden hunger in africayet, in the current investigations, weiss et al.2 and pasquini et al.3 identify cog0253 proteins as putative zinc chaperones. these evolutionarily conserved proteins make up a poorly understood subset of a broader enzyme family known as p-loop g3e gtpases, which use energy generated by hydrolysis of the molecule gtp for the transfer of metal ions (including iron, cobalt and nickel)6. some evidence has indicated that expression of the genes encoding the cog0253 proteins is induced when zinc is limited7 — could they therefore be the missing zinc metallochaperones?the two groups searched for evolutionarily conserved proteins that could interact physically with cog0253 — weiss et al. using the human, mouse and zebrafish versions of the protein, and pasquini et al. the human and yeast proteins. both sets of screens identified the enzyme methionine aminopeptidase 1 (metap1; known as map1 in yeast) as the only interacting enzyme found in all species. metap1 uses two metal ions to catalyse the removal of a methionine amino-acid residue from the amino terminus of proteins, thereby affecting the proteins’ turnover and other functions8. the groups showed that these metal ions can be zinc.weiss and colleagues examined the interaction between cog0253 and metap1 in vertebrates in more detail. they found that recognition between the two proteins involves a specific amino-acid sequence (dubbed cpelvpi) on cog0253, and a ‘zinc-finger’ domain in metap1 that already contains two zinc ions (fig. 1). both groups showed that, once the proteins associate, cog0253 catalyses gtp hydrolysis; this generates the energy to power a conformational change that is thought to enable zinc transfer from cog0253 to metap1, activating the latter. the groups therefore renamed cog0253 as zn-regulated gtpase metalloprotein activator 1 (zng1).figure 1 | a chaperone for zinc ions. two groups2,3 report that, when levels of zinc(ii) ions in the body are low, they are preferentially allocated to the enzyme methionine aminopeptidase 1 (metap1), through an interaction with the chaperone protein zng1. a, metap1 has a zinc-finger domain, with two zinc ions that can interact with a specific amino-acid sequence in zng1 (cpelvpi), and a core that can receive metal ions. zng1 carries a zinc ion and a molecule of the nucleotide gtp. b, binding between the two proteins triggers hydrolysis of gtp to gdp. this reaction is thought to provide the energy for a conformational change in zng1 that drives transfer of its zinc ion to the core of metap1. c, the proteins undock as nucleotide exchange replaces gdp with gtp once more. metap1 — activated by the zinc ion — can be released to perform crucial cell functions. (adapted from fig. 4g of ref. 2.)they went on to show (weiss et al. in mice and zebrafish, pasquini et al. in yeast) that genetic deletion of the zng1 gene exacerbates the growth defects caused by zinc deficiency. thus, zng1 maintains the function of metap1 in low-zinc conditions. by contrast, pasquini et al. report that, when zinc ions are replete, they can reach their destination in metap1 without the assistance of zng1 (expression of which is repressed when zinc levels are high7).together, the studies suggest a hierarchy in zinc-ion distribution, with a metallochaperone acting as a safeguard to ensure that metap1 receives the zinc it needs to perform its crucial role as a ‘checkpoint’ protein that regulates proper cell division9. indeed, weiss et al. showed that deleting zng1 has the same effects as inhibiting metap1 in mouse cells; namely, reduced proliferation and functioning of mitochondria, the cellular organelles that serve as power stations. pasquini and colleagues, by contrast, focused on analysing the changes of proteins in zng1-deficient yeast, and found that the abundance of proteins in the ribosome, the cell’s protein-producing factory, is affected. a zinc-sensing protein gives flies a gut feeling for growththe discoveries mark an important step forward in our understanding of how some proteins — probably a limited number of zinc-requiring enzymes — receive their zinc ions. chaperone-mediated zinc-ion transfer now becomes the third known mechanism for allocating zinc ions. the first depends on a pool of available zinc ions, and the second on metallothionein proteins. these proteins serve as zinc buffers; they can also transfer zinc ions or copper ions directly to client proteins in vitro in the same way as do copper metallochaperones, but without using energy from gtp hydrolysis10.both groups are candid in discussing the limitations of their work. as they highlight, many aspects of zng1 biology remain to be explored. for instance, is zinc indeed the metal accepted by metap1 under zinc deficiency? some methionine aminopeptidases, including the yeast enzyme, can use cobalt, and pasquini et al. demonstrate that yeast zng1 can transfer cobalt as well as zinc. the promiscuity in metal usage is also evident from the fact that the 3d crystal structure of human metap1 was determined with cobalt rather than zinc8. details of the mechanisms by which zng1 acquires, binds to and transfers zinc ions are yet to be elucidated. five versions of the zng1 protein exist in humans — do they target different proteins and, if so, how do recognition codes vary? finally, the exact roles of zng1 and its interaction with metap1 in ribosome function remain to be investigated.the discovery of a zinc-dependent process crucial for growth under zinc limitation has implications in a range of fields. for example, it indicates that zng1 could be useful as a direly needed biomarker for cellular zinc deficiency. in addition, it provides roads for investigating the effects of targeting zng1, metap1 and zinc in proliferative diseases such as cancer.