phylogeny estimation of newly discovered aquatic copiotrophic rickettsiales indicates evolution of host dependency from extracellular species and the origin of mitochondria from an unknown proteobacterial lineage.you have full access to this article via your institution.the evolutionary origins of obligate host association of bacterial symbionts are often difficult to ascertain and controversial. in particular, the ancient endosymbiosis that led to formation of mitochondria and the rise of eukaryotes is fraught with contention. writing in nature microbiology, schön et al.1 uncover and analyse aquatic alphaproteobacterial metagenome-assembled genomes (mags) corresponding to previously undescribed rickettsiales clades, providing insights into how rickettsial host association emerged and evolved independent of the mitochondrial ancestor.since the late lynn margulis theorized that endosymbiosis shaped the origin of eukaryotes, scientists have sought the identity of the host and symbiont progenitors. robust evidence indicates that an endosymbiosis between asgard archaea and an intracellular bacterium fuelled eukaryogenesis2. genes transferred from numerous microbes to this archaeal genome coincided with cognate gene loss in the entrapped bacterium3, which became mitochondria. while mitochondrial genome reduction has varied across eukaryotes, only a few dozen common genes are useful for phylogeny estimation with bacterial counterparts. despite this limitation, most studies implicate bacteria within or closely related to alphaproteobacteria as sister to the mitochondrial progenitor4,5,6.phylogeny estimation artefacts, combined with several molecular evolutionary features shared by mitochondria and some alphaproteobacteria, have precluded agreement on the mitochondrial sister lineage. these shared traits, often associated with genome downsizing, include unequal nucleotide frequencies (skewed towards at), codon biases and accelerated evolutionary rates. when coupled with limited and/or biased taxon sampling, the placement of mitochondria and certain alphaproteobacteria in phylogeny estimations is often erroneous, even if statistically robust.one alphaproteobacterial lineage, order rickettsiales, has garnered substantial appeal as the sister to the mitochondrial ancestor. historically, rickettsiales has been organized into three families, rickettsiaceae, anaplasmataceae and midichloriaceae, all of which include obligate intracellular species7. while rickettsiaceae and anaplasmataceae contain deadly human pathogens (for example, the etiological agents of epidemic typhus, rocky mountain spotted fever, scrub typhus, anaplasmosis and ehrlichiosis) and widespread endosymbionts manipulating the reproductive biology of invertebrate hosts (wolbachia strains), a general foundation of metabolic parasitism defines all rickettsiales8. dependency on host metabolites evolved concomitantly with the loss of cognate biosynthesis pathways, a process originally coined ‘reductive genome evolution’9. the historical argument that mitochondria and rickettsiales diverged from a common intracellular symbiont implies that accelerated genome reduction (mitochondria) or gene loss tempered by gene acquisition (rickettsiales10) led to host dependency.rickettsiales phylogenetics has factored significantly in the effort to identify the mitochondrial ancestor. a group of obligate intracellular protist endosymbionts (holosporales) and a lineage of extracellular aquatic bacterioplankton (sar11) have both been classified in rickettsiales, leading to conflicting hypotheses on mitochondrial origin. however, studies utilizing approaches to minimize the impact of base compositional bias and evolutionary rate heterogeneity determined that holosporales and sar11 form distinct alphaproteobacterial lineages outside of rickettsiales11,12, which was further supported by oceanic mag datasets to increase alphaproteobacterial genomic diversity4. this suggested that the mitochondrial progenitor diverged before alphaproteobacteria4.recent studies utilizing mags still present conflicting results: focusing on taxon sampling over excluding compositionally heterogeneous data recovers a rickettsiales-mitochondria sister relationship;6 conversely, greater mitochondrial gene sampling and use of evolutionary models to accommodate compositional heterogeneity yields the divergence of mitochondria independent of alphaproteobacteria5. a tangential work reporting a novel rickettsial endosymbiont (deianiraea vastatrix, placed within a new family, deianiraeaceae) that grows extracellularly on its paramecium host raised the possibility that the rickettsiales ancestor was a facultative intracellular symbiont and that other undescribed ectosymbiotic or extracellular species could inform on the evolution of rickettsial host associations13.in their study, schön et al. probed mags to provide clarity on the evolution of obligate host associations in rickettsiales. phylogenomics analyses yielded substantial evidence supporting independent evolution of host dependency in mitochondria and rickettsiales (fig. 1). the authors discovered seven deep-branching alphaproteobacterial mags from aquatic environments, proposing two unique rickettsial families, mitibacteraceae and athabascaceae. analysis of these basal genomes revealed traits characteristic of free-living and biofilm-associated bacteria, as shown by the presence of cell motility and adhesion systems, complete amino acid biosynthesis pathways, importers for sulfate and ammonia, an exporter for arsenic, and catalase (fig. 1, top inset). schön and colleagues also identified four mags that form a sister clade to the deianiraeaceae. they named a seventh rickettsiales family, gamibacteraceae, which has a metabolic capacity similar to that of deianiraeaceae. these collective genomes provide a framework to map the rise of host dependency in bacteria that diverged from aquatic copiotrophic, biofilm-associated species (fig. 1). all descendants retained the obligate symbiotic lifestyle (endo- or ectosymbiotic), diversifying to occupy numerous ecological niches and adopting countless strategies to parasitize their eukaryotic hosts.the tree summarizes phylogeny estimations reported by schön et al1. the asterisks denote the newly proposed families mitibacteraceae, athabascaceae and gamibacteraceae. human icons depict the rickettsial lineages harbouring known human pathogens. nodes 1–4 describe important evolutionary events supporting the independent paths to host associations in the mitochondrial progenitor and the four derived rickettsiales families. the dashed branches indicate evolution of host dependency. top inset: key lifestyle traits of rickettsial families identified from comparative genomics analysis. bottom inset: diagram of the rickettsiales rvh t4ss, with defining characteristics described on the right14. rickettsiales utilize rvh for protist predation and interbacterial warfare (node 3, green), while derived families repurposed rvh for parasitism by secreting effectors into host cells for subversion of cellular processes (node 4, blue). eps, exopolysaccharide; lps, lipopolysaccharide.curiously, all rickettsiales carry the rvh type iv secretion system (t4ss), a divergent t4ss enriched in gene duplication and lacking a t-pilus relative to other bacterial t4sss14 (fig. 1, bottom inset). considering the rvh t4ss functions in host-cell parasitism, schön et al. hypothesize that mitibacteraceae and athabascaceae species instead utilize the rvh t4ss for protist predation and/or intercellular warfare. this is supported by the absence of described rvh t4ss effectors and the presence of numerous peptidoglycan-binding proteins, which are typical arsenal for bacteria-killing t4sss. given the unique oddities of the rvh t4ss and its strict conservation in rickettsiales, these genes will be invaluable signatures for identifying other rickettsiales in future metagenomic studies.metagenomics better represents genomic diversity than the skewed picture that can arise from compilation of genomes from clinically and agriculturally relevant species alone. rickettsiales’ ubiquity in nature makes them highly amenable to mag analysis to discover novel species15, to revise their classification and to inform on the evolution of pathogenesis. as demonstrated by schön et al., tapping into previously uncharacterized genomic diversity can illuminate and root the tree of life.schön, m. e., martijn, j., vosseberg, j., köstlbacher, s. & ettema, t. j. g. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01169-x (2022).article pubmed google scholar spang, a. et al. nature 521, 173–179 (2015).cas article google scholar thiergart, t., landan, g., schenk, m., dagan, t. & martin, w. f. genome biol. evol. 4, 466–485 (2012).cas article google scholar martijn, j., vosseberg, j., guy, l., offre, p. & ettema, t. j. g. nature 557, 101–105 (2018).cas article google scholar muñoz-gómez, s. a. et al. nat. ecol. evol. 6, 253–262 (2022).article google scholar fan, l. et al. nat. ecol. evol. 4, 1213–1219 (2020).article google scholar salje, j. nat. rev. microbiol. 19, 375–390 (2021).cas article google scholar driscoll, t. p. et al. mbio 8, e00859-17 (2017).article google scholar andersson, s. g. e. et al. nature 396, 133–40 (1998).cas article google scholar gillespie, j. j. et al. j. bacteriol. 194, 376–94 (2012).cas article google scholar muñoz-gómez, s. a. et al. elife 8, e42535 (2019).article google scholar viklund, j., ettema, t. j. g. & andersson, s. g. e. mol. biol. evol. 29, 599–615 (2012).cas article google scholar castelli, m. et al. isme j. 13, 2280–2294 (2019).article google scholar gillespie, j. j. et al. infect. immun. 78, 1809–1823 (2010).cas article google scholar davison, h. r. et al. nat. commun. 13, 2630 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of microbiology and immunology, university of maryland school of medicine, baltimore, md, usavictoria i. verhoeve & joseph j. gillespieyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to joseph j. gillespie.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsverhoeve, v.i., gillespie, j.j. origin of rickettsial host dependency unravelled. nat microbiol 7, 1110–1111 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01187-9download citationpublished: 02 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01187-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 