us homes are large by any international standards. full grid decarbonization and electrification of residential energy uses — along with extensive house renovation — are all required, but smaller homes could make this much easier to deliver.you have full access to this article via your institution.climate change mitigation will require a profound transformation in the way we build and use our homes. approximately one-third of all our energy use takes place in buildings1, where we very often burn fossil fuels for cooking and heating. accelerating new construction with better efficiency standards and the renovation of existing dwellings have been the main approaches globally to reduce emissions and energy uses in buildings. writing in nature climate change, peter berrill and colleagues2 report that, for the united states, a deep renovation of existing homes and a rapid decarbonization of the electricity grid are the most effective strategies to reduce emissions. however, these are difficult to deliver at the required scale, necessitating more multifamily sharing and a reduction in the size of the largest new houses.the residential building sector is one of the most difficult to decarbonize. most decarbonization strategies rely on the deployment of new and more efficient technologies. yet, for buildings, this strategy is unlikely to make a decisive contribution in time. although we know how to build ultra-efficient new houses with excellent insulation and an optimal design that reduces energy requirements to close to zero, new buildings are expected to be only a small fraction of all houses in 2050 in developed economies. because buildings are the goods with the longest lifetimes, most of the houses that will be used in 2050 already exist today. this challenge is particularly acute in the united states, which has one of the highest levels of per-capita residential energy use in the world1, owing to large home sizes, poor energy efficiency and electricity generated from fossil fuel combustion.the decarbonization of buildings will require full electrification to eliminate direct fossil fuel combustion for cooking and heating, and a complete decarbonization of the electricity grid. this will require the installation of heat pumps in existing residential buildings and major investments in the deployment of nuclear and renewable power generation. however, unfortunately, this is unlikely to be enough. a complete electrification of all our energy uses will increase our demand for electricity at the time when new nuclear and renewable power infrastructure will need to be deployed to replace fossil fuels. this pace of deployment is unlikely to be able to meet such an increased demand for electricity, unless we reduce our future energy demand by increasing energy efficiency and building occupancy3.there are plenty of factors that influence energy uses and emissions associated with residential buildings. these include the design and type of materials used in new construction, the types of renovation intervention, the evolution of the electricity supply infrastructure and the pace and typology of new construction. engineering models that consider all these factors are rare, but berrill and colleagues2 have developed a high-resolution dynamic model of housing characteristics, which also captures geographical variations within the united states.the authors have estimated total emissions until 2060 associated with 108 scenarios, which result from the all the combinations of 3 different options for the evolution of the housing stock, 4 types of change in the characteristics of new housing, 3 levels of renovation of existing dwellings and 3 different paths for the electricity supply infrastructure. although this is a large number of scenarios, it still describes only a limited set of infinite possible future pathways for the us residential sector. however, the work carried out by peter berrill and colleagues reveals the most important aspects of future changes in the housing stock that most influence their future emissions.the authors show that the path to decarbonize us housing is very narrow. of the 108 combinations tested, the scenario that leads to the greatest emission cuts combines a very rapid decarbonization of the grid, extensive renovations to existing homes and a reduction in the size of new housing. yet, this scenario enables a reduction of only 91% of emissions between 2020 and 2050, and it would require 57% of the us’s entire carbon budget for limiting the rise in global average temperatures to 1.5 °c by 2060 with 50% likelihood. achieving zero emissions would therefore require solutions beyond the most ambitious of those tested by the authors. these solutions include a further reduction in the size of new single-family homes, a greater use of multifamily buildings, and innovations in building design and material choice to reduce the emissions associated with the production of construction materials.a complete decarbonization of the housing sector is a challenging endeavour. timber has the potential to reduce material production emissions by replacing steel and concrete structures, but only if it is sustainably sourced and is used efficiently and in long-lived buildings4. heat pumps are essential to electrify heating and improve efficiency, but they are expensive and their deployment at scale depends on further policy incentives. however, berrill and colleagues2 show that reducing the size and number of dwellings seems to be a requirement to reduce the risk of failing to meet climate targets. but achieving this is likely to produce far-reaching implications in urban planning and social organization that are yet unknown.world energy balances (iea, 2021).berrill, p., wilson, e. j. h., reyna, j. l., fontanini, a. d. & hertwich, e. g. nat. clim. change https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01429-y (2022).emissions gap report 2019 (unep, 2019).hawkins, w. struct. eng. 99, 18–20 (2021). google scholar download referencesdepartment of engineering, university of cambridge, cambridge, ukandré cabrera serrenhoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to andré cabrera serrenho.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionscabrera serrenho, a. big homes hinder emission cuts. nat. clim. chang. 12, 705–706 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01434-1download citationpublished: 02 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01434-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 