tiny phytoplankton are the base of ocean production and thus critical to carbon storage, carbon fluxes and living marine resources. now, research suggests that the vertical migration of these organisms provides a previously under-recognized resiliency to climate warming.you have full access to this article via your institution.movement is a fundamental behaviour of animals both on land and in oceans. less obvious but similarly critical is the movement of land plants in their growth towards light, water and nutrients. even more difficult to grasp is the idea that the movement of tiny ocean phytoplankton exerts a fundamental control on global ocean ecology. from the greek ‘phyton’ for plant and ‘plankton’ for drifter, the dominant characteristic of phytoplankton is their diminutive size relative to the vastness of ocean currents and biogeography. scientists have generally assumed — both in the interpretation of ocean observations and construction of ecological and biogeochemical models — that phytoplankton are primarily passive drifters. now, writing in nature climate change, kai wirtz and colleagues1 argue for the incorporation of phytoplankton active vertical migration as a key process that is ignored in most ocean ecological and biogeochemical models. active vertical migration provides a physiologically justifiable mechanism of present-day phytoplankton vertical migration, as well as a potentially powerful means of ecological resiliency under future warming.ocean phytoplankton provide the base of ecosystems across two-thirds of earth’s surface. in the upper-ocean sunlit zone, or euphotic zone, limited to the top hundred metres or so, nutrients brought to the surface by ocean circulation are drawn down by phytoplankton production and exported to depth in sinking material. while their generally microscopic size makes them easy to dismiss as minimally motile, there have long been indications that phytoplankton are capable of vertical migration. a wide range of evidence comes from field observations supported by well-established physiological mechanisms (fig. 1) that allow some phytoplankton in nutrient-depleted areas to sink into nutrient-replete subsurface waters, take up nutrients, and float back into the euphotic zone for photosynthesis — so-called nutrient mining. phytoplankton vertical migration mechanisms include swimming using flagella in flagellates and dinoflagellates2, buoyancy control through low-density lipid storage capability in all eukaryotic phytoplankton, high-density sio2 in diatoms3 and caco3 in coccolithophorids4, exudation of sticky organic polymers capable of adhering to sinking particles5, and organizing mats and colonies to increase effective sinking and floating speeds6. while this topic has been the focus of anecdotal and qualitative interest for decades, there has been limited progress on the modelling front outside the localized migration of species capable of building large colonies6.these include active swimming using flagella, accumulation of lipids and other buoyant organic materials, accumulation of dense sio2 and caco3 minerals, exudation of sticky polymers and the development of mats and colonies. each mechanism allows phytoplankton to overcome brownian motion in different ways. note the arrow direction indicates sinking or floating, and thickness indicates relative speed, where thicker arrows mean faster and thinner slower.coupled carbon–climate earth system models (esms) project varying and, in some cases, severe vulnerability of phytoplankton productivity to climate warming over this century7, and the trophic amplification of these changes to zooplankton and fish8 is of paramount concern to the future of marine systems and their ability to support human use. in general terms, warming of the surface ocean is expected to enhance stratification, which will reduce the supply of nutrients from below the nutrient-depleted euphotic zone, increasing nutrient limitation in much of the world’s oceans.wirtz and colleagues argue that in ignoring phytoplankton motility some esms make unrealistically high assumptions about the efficiency of phytoplankton photosynthesis to artificially deepen productivity and to reproduce the combined depths of the euphotic zone and nutrient prevalence, or ‘nutricline’. to address this lack of realism, wirtz and colleagues take the nutrient, light and other ecosystem diagnostics from a fully coupled carbon–climate esm9 as external forcing for an offline global, one-dimensional model of vertically migrating phytoplankton. while the esm drives the migrating phytoplankton ecosystem, the effects do not feed back into the esm. the authors find that the inclusion of vertical migration in their offline model augments the esm phytoplankton production by 25%. further, they find that the fraction of phytoplankton production driven by nutrients from below the euphotic zone (rather than those recycled within the euphotic zone) increases by 40%. most remarkably, in a sensitivity study of strong future warming, the authors’ combined esm and offline migrating phytoplankton models indicated higher production under global warming than in the control simulations, even as enhanced stratification and shallower mixing reduce physical nutrient transport into the surface ocean. this surprising and encouraging result suggests that phytoplankton may control the depth of the nutricline far more directly than previously recognized, which, in turn, would indicate a powerful means of phytoplankton community resilience to climate warming.there are several reasons to treat these initial results with caution, however. the study treats phytoplankton vertical migration and associated nutrient uptake in isolation — outside the comprehensive, integrated esm. as such, it ignores key compensating feedbacks associated with nutrient mining that may limit the overall role of phytoplankton motility in the real ocean. most directly, drawdown of the upper nutricline by migrating phytoplankton may diminish nutrients otherwise supplied by physical processes. second, the model ignores shading by migrating phytoplankton on esm light levels that would decrease its phytoplankton production. further, vertical migration is only one of the many unresolved earth system mechanisms argued to deepen the nutricline, which might alternatively explain the observed relationship between the euphotic zone and nutricline in stratified oceans. these mechanisms include unresolved physics at the mesoscale10, submesoscale11 and in thin layers12, photoacclimation and other aspects of biodiversity in the maintenance of the deep chlorophyll maximum13, zooplankton grazing responses to low light14, and bacterial nutrient uptake during dissolved organic matter respiration15. while there remain many challenges to the robust characterization of the diversity of the physiological and ecological approaches to nutrient and light harvesting and of the effectiveness of phytoplankton vertical migration to modulate ocean productivity, wirtz and colleagues make a productive first step to quantify at the global scale one of the most challenging aspects of phytoplankton ecology.wirtz, k., smith, s. l., mathis, m. & taucher, j. nat. clim. change https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01430-5 (2022).article google scholar watanabe, m., kohata, k. & kimura, t. limnol. oceanogr. 36, 593–602 (1991).article google scholar villareal, t. a. et al. nature 397, 423–425 (1999).cas article google scholar krumhardt, k. m., lovenduski, n. s., iglesias-rodriguez, m. d. & kleypas, j. a. prog. oceanogr. 159, 276–295 (2017).article google scholar alldredge, a. l. & silver, m. w. prog. oceanogr. 20, 41–82 (1988).article google scholar white, a. e., spitz, y. h. & letelier, r. m. mar. ecol. prog. ser. 323, 35–45 (2006).article google scholar kwiatkowski, l. et al. biogeosciences 17, 3439–3470 (2020).cas article google scholar tittensor, d. p. et al. nat. clim. change 11, 973–981 (2021).article google scholar giorgetta, m. a. et al. j. adv. model. earth syst. 5, 572–597 (2013).article google scholar mcgillicuddy, d. j. et al. nature 394, 263–266 (1998).cas article google scholar lévy, m., franks, p. j. & smith, k. s. nat. commun. 9, 4758 (2018).article google scholar durham, w. m. & stocker, r. annu. rev. mar. sci. 4, 177–207 (2012).article google scholar cullen, j. j. annu. rev. mar. sci. 7, 207–239 (2015).article google scholar moeller, h. v., laufkötter, c., sweeney, e. m. & johnson, m. d. nat. commun. 10, 1978 (2019).article google scholar fawcett, s. e., johnson, k. s., riser, s. c., van oostende, n. & sigman, d. m. mar. chem. 207, 108–123 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesnoaa/oar geophysical fluid dynamics laboratory, princeton, nj, usajohn p. dunneyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to john p. dunne.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdunne, j.p. fall and rise of the phytoplankton. nat. clim. chang. 12, 708–709 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01439-wdownload citationpublished: 02 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01439-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 