a clever phononic crystal design produces a wide band gap for hypersonic phonons.you have full access to this article via your institution.modern information technology relies mostly on the control of two fundamental particles — the electron and the photon — for carrying electricity and light, respectively. but those particles are not the only ones when discussing phenomena taking place in matter. often considered to be a nuisance in sensitive devices, phonons are the bosonic quanta of vibrations in matter, highly analogous to photons, but more difficult to control. they can be a channel of disturbance to electrons, photons and other desired vibrational modes. worse yet, phonons can usually exist at all frequencies up to thz scale. writing in nature nanotechnology, florez et al.1 have now reported a significant advance in keeping phonons quiet at technologically relevant frequencies.in recent decades scientists have learned to engineer and control phonons to a higher and higher degree, for a wide range of frequencies spanning from khz corresponding to acoustic waves to thz relevant for heat transport. this field of science is often called phononics2. one of the key devices used in phononics research is the phononic crystal (pnc) (ref. 3) — a structure with periodically varying elastic properties which modifies the phonon band structure, i.e. how the phonon energy depends on its wave vector. the study by florez et al.1 is an important step in demonstrating the potential of nanoscale-phononic crystals in the hypersonic, ghz frequency range.the physical principle of most pnc structures relies on the familiar wave interference phenomenon. this means that if the wavelength is of the order of the period of the pnc, bragg scattering will take place causing destructive interference, and creating thus a region in frequency where no vibrational states are present — a band gap. to create such a gap in the ghz frequency range, one needs to scale down the periodicity of the structure to a few hundreds of nanometres. in addition, the effectiveness of the gap to isolate a frequency of interest is determined by the spectral width. this spectral width depends on the details of the unit cell geometry of the pnc [fig. 1]. florez at al.1 have fabricated an advanced two-dimensional pnc design (shamrock-shaped holes in suspended si, neck size down to ~40 nm) that gives omnidirectional band gaps with a centre frequency up to 10 ghz, and with a large spectral width of ~5 ghz. additionally, they have experimentally demonstrated such gaps using brillouin scattering of light, an inelastic scattering technique that can be used to map the phonon energy vs wave vector relationship.schematic of the phononic crystal design used in ref. 1 to produce a large band gap at around 10 ghz of width 5 ghz.the researchers use such a gap to demonstrate a wave guide by sandwiching a region where ghz phonons can propagate in between pnc regions where they otherwise would not — a useful feature for acoustic wave devices. another possible application would be in optomechanics, where mechanical resonators in ghz frequencies are engineered to couple strongly with infrared light for applications in sensing, metrology, quantum technology and studies of fundamental quantum phenomena. pnc isolation of such optomechanical resonators has been shown before to be very beneficial for the performance of such devices4,5. one more area of possible future applications would be in thermal conductance engineering, in particular at cryogenic temperatures, where thermal phonon frequencies are in the same 10 ghz frequency range and where pncs have already been demonstrated to have a very strong impact on thermal conductance6.the question left for the future is whether or not the ideas presented by florez et al. can be easily extended to even higher frequencies? it would require even more advanced nanofabrication techniques, as the dimensions would need to be scaled down even further. perhaps some approaches based on self-assembly might help in this regard, but only the future will tell.florez, o. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01178-1 (2022).article google scholar maldovan, m. nature 503, 209 (2013).cas article google scholar vasileaidis, t. et al. j. appl. phys. 129, 160901 (2021).article google scholar chan, j. et al. nature 478, 89 (2011).cas article google scholar maccabe, g. s. et al. science 370, 840 (2020).cas article google scholar zen, n. et al. nat. comm. 5, 3435 (2014).article google scholar download referencesnanoscience center, department of physics, university of jyvaskyla, jyväskylä, finlandilari j. maasiltayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to ilari j. maasilta.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmaasilta, i.j. phonons hushed. nat. nanotechnol. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01181-6download citationpublished: 08 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01181-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 