dipole–dipole crosstalk between fluorophores separated by a distance of less than 10 nm induces changes in their photophysics, which adds a challenge to localization microscopy in the sub-10-nm regime.you have full access to this article via your institution.conventional light microscopy is subject to the diffraction limit, first described1 by ernst abbe in 1873. the diffraction limit means that two objects — for example, fluorescent emitters — that are spatially separated by a distance less than ~250 nm cannot be resolved, which sets the lower limit for the resolution of conventional light microscopes.fortunately, the past two decades have witnessed the landmark advent of super-resolution microscopy techniques that circumvent the diffraction limit. this has enabled scientists to explore the nanoworld. super-resolution methods have been vital in the investigation of biological specimens, where it became possible to study the nanoscale organization of proteins, chromatin, glycans and many other cellular components2,3,4,5,6. in tribute to the importance of super-resolution microscopy, eric betzig, w. e. moerner and stefan hell, the founders of the field, were awarded the nobel prize in chemistry in 2014.a subclass of super-resolution microscopy is single-molecule localization microscopy (smlm). smlm relies on controlling the emission state of fluorophores: instead of all fluorophores that label a structure emitting simultaneously, the majority are switched into a transient dark state. in this way, only a small subset of fluorophores are active at the same time. while each of these emitters still appears as a diffraction-limited blob on the camera, they can be localized with nanometer precision via fitting with an appropriate model function. the final super-resolved image is reconstructed by recording many camera frames with different subsets of emitters being active in each frame (fig. 1a)6,7.a, principle of single-molecule localization microscopy. (i) all fluorophores (red) emitting at the same time leads to a diffraction-limited image of the investigated structure (gray dashed line). (ii) sequential detection of individual fluorophores (top) and determination of their position with nanometer precision (bottom). (iii) the reconstructed, super-resolved image. b, fluorophore communication at distances below 10 nm. (i) no altered photophysics for an emitting fluorophore (red) that is more than 10 nm away from neighbors in the dark state (gray). (ii) altered photophysics at spacings below 10 nm. c, the importance of sampling. (i) the ground-truth structure. (ii) an undersampled reconstruction. (iii) a reconstruction with proper sampling.nowadays, localization precisions of few nanometers are straightforward to achieve. however, the localization precision of an individual fluorophore should not be confused with the true image resolution: ultrahigh image resolution requires not only precise localization of single fluorophores, but also (i) dense labeling of the imaged structure with fluorophores and (ii) comprehensive detection of those fluorophores. this is because of sampling of the structure: if intricate features are not labeled, or fluorescence emission of the corresponding labels is not detected, these features will not appear in the final reconstruction. in other words, ultrahigh localization precision of single fluorophores does not necessarily correspond to ultrahigh image resolutions6.despite tremendous advances in precise localization of single fluorophores as well as labeling protocols, image resolutions below 10 nm have proven to be difficult to obtain. while it has been demonstrated that sub-10-nm super-resolution microscopy is feasible8,9, it is still a challenge. in this issue of nature methods, helmerich, beliu, sauer and colleagues10. report on intriguing photophysical phenomena that occur at fluorophore spacings below 10 nm. the authors describe how direct fluorophore interactions influence image resolution. these findings advance our understanding of smlm and identify a key factor that contributes to the challenges encountered in smlm when entering the sub-10-nm regime.the authors found that at short (well below 10 nm) interfluorophore distances, the fluorophores start to communicate via dipole–dipole interactions. specifically, the data suggest that energy transfer between a fluorophore in the bright state (donor) and neighboring fluorophores in dark states (acceptors) accelerates photoactivation, which causes faster blinking, followed by premature and irreversible photobleaching (fig. 1b). crucially, this rapid bleaching might result in missing localizations in biological samples. as emphasized above, dense sampling of the imaged structure is mandatory for high image resolution; otherwise, ultrahigh localization precision cannot unfold its potential (fig. 1c).this phenomenon was identified using dna origami structures as a precisely controllable model system. the authors designed dna origamis with different interfluorophore distances of 3, 6, 9 and 18 nm. for 3 and 6 nm interfluorophore spacings, a complex and accelerated blinking behavior of the fluorophores (‘flickering’) was observed during the early phase of irradiation, followed by rapid bleaching. consequently, for these fluorophore spacings, a large proportion of the localizations were detected early in the data acquisition. for the majority of the 3-nm origamis, for example, 80% of all localizations recorded during a 10-min imaging session were detected within the first minute. by contrast, no premature bleaching was observed for the 9- and 18-nm origamis, and a comparably small change in blinking behavior was reported. as a control, the authors used dna-paint, which relies not on photophysical tuning of the emission state, but rather on transient binding interactions between two complementary dna strands. one strand labels the imaging target and the other carries a fluorophore11. thus, in this method, there is no interfluorophore communication, and indeed, the photophysical parameters were identical regardless of the spacing of the imaging targets. in the light of these observations, the use of dna-paint might be recommendable when utmost resolution is required.notably, the authors not only describe these photophysical phenomena, but also implement a strategy to extract interfluorophore distances on the basis of off-state lifetimes, temporal development of localization statistics, photon antibunching, and fluorescence lifetimes (dubbed ‘photoswitching fingerprint analysis’). this strategy is demonstrated in a realistic biological setting. using genetic code expansion in conjunction with click chemistry, the authors implemented site-specific labeling of different subunits of three cell membrane receptors: one monomeric, one dimeric and one homotetrameric. using the photoswitching fingerprint analysis, the authors were able to verify the interfluorophore distances expected from the known labeling positions and the crystal structure.looking forward, it will be imperative to harness modern optics and labeling tools to further address urgent questions arising from this study: first, we need to discern the exact mechanism by which these photophysical interactions take place at the molecular level; second, we need to dissect how these mechanisms contribute to the final achievable image resolution; third, we need to understand how the observed effects differ across different dyes; and finally, we need to develop methods that circumvent fast blinking and bleaching or, if that is not possible, maximize the information extracted from the photoswitching fingerprint analysis. overall, the investigation conducted by helmerich, beliu, sauer and colleagues has identified a novel phenomenon that resides at the core of smlm. while insights from this study bring new challenges to the optical table, they will undoubtedly enable us to build more powerful microscopes and create even better images with them.abbe, e. arch. mikrosc. anat. 9, 413–468 (1873).article google scholar legant, w. r. et al. nat. methods 13, 359–365 (2016).article google scholar sieben, c., banterle, n., douglass, k. m., gönczy, p. & manley, s. nat. methods 15, 777–780 (2018).cas article google scholar otterstrom, j. et al. nucleic acids res. 47, 8470–8484 (2019).cas article google scholar möckl, l. et al. dev. cell 50, 57–72.e6 (2019).article google scholar lelek, m. et al. nat. rev. methods primers 1, 39 (2021).cas article google scholar von diezmann, l., shechtman, y. & moerner, w. e. chem. rev. 117, 7244–7275 (2017).article google scholar weber, m. et al. nat. photonics 15, 361–366 (2021).cas article google scholar zhang, y. et al. nat. methods 17, 225–231 (2020).cas article google scholar helmerich, d. a. et al. nat. methods https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01548-6 (2022).article google scholar schnitzbauer, j., strauss, m. t., schlichthaerle, t., schueder, f. & jungmann, r. nat. protoc. 12, 1198–1228 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesmax planck institute for the science of light, erlangen, germanykarim almahayni, malte spiekermann & leonhard möcklyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to leonhard möckl.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsalmahayni, k., spiekermann, m. & möckl, l. fluorophores’ talk turns them dark. nat methods 19, 932–933 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01565-5download citationpublished: 01 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01565-5anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 