rapid experimental evolution and targeted genetic engineering of escherichia coli in a stinkbug host reveals that a single mutation can produce a host-beneficial symbiosis.you have full access to this article via your institution.many animals and plants associate with beneficial microbes that enhance host fitness by supplementing or recycling nutrients, supplying digestive or detoxifying enzymes, or providing protection from antagonists. while the taxonomic composition and functional relevance of host-associated microbial communities, as well as their evolutionary histories, have been extensively studied across many different symbiotic systems, little is known about the initial steps leading to the establishment of host-beneficial symbioses, let alone their molecular underpinnings. writing in nature microbiology, koga et al. report a fascinating study in which they engineered a symbiosis de novo in the stinkbug plautia stali and used experimental evolution to select for symbiont adaptations that are beneficial to host fitness1 (fig. 1). in two independent evolutionary lines, they were able to identify individual mutations in the newly emerged symbionts that instantly improved host fitness, demonstrating that host-beneficial symbioses can evolve very rapidly1.replacement of the obligate pantoea symbiont, which resides in the posterior mid-gut crypts of the stinkbug p. stali, with e. coli led to reduced fitness and modified body colouration. however, experimental evolution rescued these phenotypic effects to the level of naturally symbiotic bugs. targeted insertion of key mutations observed in the evolved lines reconstituted the same phenotypes, indicating that a novel symbiont can evolve to become beneficial to its host in a single mutational step. images reproduced with permission from ref. 1, springer nature ltd.experimental evolution provides a powerful tool to study evolutionary mechanisms in action and to unravel the molecular basis of real-time adaptations. as such, this approach has provided invaluable insights into the evolutionary dynamics of bacteria or eukaryotes adapting to their environment2 or to co-evolving antagonists3. however, experimental evolution has rarely been used to study host-beneficial symbioses, despite its potential to answer fundamental questions on the establishment, maintenance and consequences of mutualistic interactions with microorganisms4. a study by king et al. provided one of the notable exceptions, demonstrating that a mildly deleterious bacterium can rapidly evolve to protect its nematode host against a virulent pathogen5. still, this study used an established symbiosis, preventing insights into the early steps of microbial adaptation to a host.the stinkbug p. stali naturally associates with an obligate and thus far unculturable pantoea symbiont that it houses in crypts associated with the posterior mid-gut6 (fig. 1). by providing nutritional supplements, the symbiont is essential for the stinkbug’s successful development and reproduction and the typical green colouration of the cuticle6. koga et al. initially tested whether several non-symbiotic bacteria, such as bacillus subtilis and burkholderia insecticola, could colonize the stinkbug gut. these bacteria failed to establish in the gut, which ultimately resulted in the insect’s death. however, exposure to escherichia coli led to low levels of infection and the successful development of a small number of individual stinkbugs to adulthood. this observation provided the baseline for leveraging experimental evolution to test whether artificial selection can result in the transformation of an e. coli laboratory strain into a host-beneficial symbiont. using a hyper-mutating e. coli strain engineered to increase genetic variation, koga et al. passaged the bacteria through the stinkbugs and generated host lines selected for their rapid development or for their green body colour over 12 host generations1. interestingly, one line from each of the two selective regimes exhibited the same increased emergence rates, faster development and greener body colouration, indicating the improved beneficial effects of the evolved e. coli symbiont to the host. when exposed to in vitro conditions, however, the evolved e. coli lines showed smaller colony and cell sizes, loss of flagellar motility, reduced extracellular matrix production and unstable cell shape as compared with the ancestral strain, suggesting trade-offs accompanying the adaptation to the stinkbug gut.one of the strengths of experimental evolution lies in the opportunity to elucidate the molecular underpinnings of evolved adaptations by tracking genomic and transcriptomic changes over the course of the experiment7. in the newly established stinkbug–e. coli association, comparison of the e. coli lines before and after evolution into a beneficial symbiont revealed consistent differences in gene expression profiles and a similar number of fixed mutations in the genomes of the colour- and growth-selected lines1. intriguingly, both lines exhibited a mutation in an important component of the carbon catabolite repression (ccr) pathway, which regulates the expression of hundreds of genes involved in the utilization of alternative carbon sources. to test whether these mutations were individually responsible for the beneficial effect on the host, koga et al. exposed stinkbugs to e. coli strains in which the same mutations had been generated by targeted mutagenesis1. the mutants indeed significantly improved host fitness and colouration, elegantly demonstrating that a single mutation in the ccr pathway can turn a ‘naive’ bacterium into a beneficial symbiont of an insect host.many insects benefit from microbial symbionts that provision limiting nutrients and thereby enable the exploitation of otherwise prohibitively nutrient-limited dietary resources. while the mechanisms underlying the beneficial effect of the e. coli symbionts on p. stali remain unknown, studies on other heteroptera8,9 and the altered phenotypes observed for symbiont-free p. stali suggest the provisioning of essential amino acids and/or vitamins by pantoea and, to a lesser extent, e. coli. it remains speculative, however, how the ccr-impaired e. coli strains further improve the host’s fitness. does malfunction of the ccr pathway result in differential metabolic fluxes and higher leakage of amino acids or vitamins? or do the higher symbiont titres observed in evolved lines result in enhanced nutrient provisioning without a proportionate increase in the costs of symbiont maintenance? and how does the host respond to the novel symbiotic partner on a metabolic and immunological level? the answers to these questions will provide important insights into the metabolic crosstalk between host and symbiont, as well as the dynamics of host- and symbiont-level selection in shaping the evolutionary trajectory of animal–microbe symbioses.given its experimental and genetic tractability, the engineered association between p. stali and e. coli sets new standards in symbiosis research and provides the opportunity to address a plethora of fundamental questions. this association can be used to characterize different pathways for mutualism establishment and to understand the trade-offs underlying adaptations to a symbiotic partner. furthermore, as the malfunction of the ccr pathway probably relaxes selection on many other genes, monitoring subsequent genomic changes in host-adapted e. coli lines could shed new light on the initial dynamics of genome erosion in beneficial symbioses. this process is known to result in tiny symbiont genomes that are tightly associated with their host and transmitted throughout host generations10, but the early steps of genomic decay remain poorly understood. finally, tracking co-adaptations of host and symbiont on a genomic level and comparing the dynamics to those previously described for antagonistic interactions3 may yield valuable insights into how cooperative versus antagonistic interactions shape an organism’s evolutionary trajectory.if we are to understand how the ubiquitous symbiotic interactions between eukaryotes and bacteria shape life on our planet, we must embrace and describe the diversity of associations in nature. but we also need to construct a set of tractable systems that represents this natural diversity and allows us to dissect and manipulate host–symbiont interactions from the molecular to the organismic level. the study by koga et al. makes a leap in this direction, generating an experimentally and genetically tractable host-beneficial symbiosis in a single mutational step.koga, r. et al. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01179-9 (2022).article google scholar lenski, r. e. & travisano, m. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 91, 6808–6814 (1994).cas article google scholar schulte, r. d., makus, c., hasert, b., michiels, n. k. & schulenburg, h. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 107, 7359–7364 (2010).cas article google scholar hoang, k. l., morran, l. t. & gerardo, n. m. front. microbiol. 7, 16 (2016). google scholar king, k. c. et al. isme j. 10, 1915–1924 (2016).cas article google scholar hosokawa, t. et al. nat. microbiol. 1, 15011 (2016).cas article google scholar tenaillon, o. et al. nature 536, 165–170 (2016).cas article google scholar kaiwa, n. et al. curr. biol. 24, 2465–2470 (2014).cas article google scholar salem, h. et al. proc. r. soc. b 281, 20141838 (2014).article google scholar mccutcheon, j. p., boyd, b. m. & dale, c. curr. biol. 29, r485–r495 (2019).cas article google scholar download referencesi thank a. vigneron for valuable comments on the manuscript and gratefully acknowledge financial support from the max planck society and through a consolidator grant from the european research council (erc cog 819585 symbeetle).department of insect symbiosis, max planck institute for chemical ecology, jena, germanymartin kaltenpothyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to martin kaltenpoth.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionskaltenpoth, m. fast track to mutualism. nat microbiol 7, 1104–1105 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01188-8download citationpublished: 04 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01188-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 