the direct manipulation of a new kind of ferroelectric state, arising from the sliding of van der waals layers in a coordination polymer, is demonstrated.you have full access to this article via your institution.developing novel ferroelectrics that can find applications as switches, sensors and storage bits presents a substantial design challenge. conventional ceramic devices have traditionally relied on perovskite-based materials containing ions such as lead or titanium that prefer off-centre coordination environments on account of their specific electronic configurations. it is the cooperative alignment of the dipoles associated with off-centring that leads to the proper ferroelectric properties of these ceramic materials (fig. 1a). however, the restrictive chemistries of conventional ferroelectrics hinder the incorporation of magnetic moments, the coupling of which to a long-range polar state would allow for fast and low-energy non-volatile multiferroic data storage technologies. furthermore, the toxicity of lead and the desirability of flexible, wearable devices motivates the search for new mechanisms of generating ferroelectric and multiferroic materials based on organic and metal–organic technologies.a, proper ferroelectricity in pbtio3 arising from off-centre displacements of ti4+ cations within the tio6 octahedra. alignment of dipole vectors (black arrows) from neighbouring unit cells gives a net polarization (p). b, improper ferroelectricity in ca3mn2o7 driven by two non-polar distortions (octahedral rotations and tilts) that couple to displacements parallel to the natural layering axis. anti-aligned polar displacements in the different layers (black and grey arrows) do not fully cancel out, giving a net polarization. c, in the crystal structure of [cd(15-crown-5)][cd2cl6], the acentric crown ether rings carry a local polarization (orange arrow). carbon, oxygen and hydrogen atoms are shown as black, red and pink spheres, respectively. these rings enclose cd centres (orange circles) that connect chlorocadmate columns (orange polyhedra). d, schematic representation of the reversal of crown ether polarization order and layer sliding upon polarization inversion. in all instances, the bold red arrows indicate the direction of the spontaneous long-range net polarization.an alternative paradigm exists for designing ferroelectric materials that involves combinations of non-polar orderings coupling together to collectively break inversion symmetry — known as ‘hybrid’ improper ferroelectricity (fig. 1b). first discussed in the context of layered inorganic perovskites1,2, this approach provides a promising route to circumvent the restrictive design criteria for conventional ferroelectrics. recent trends have focused on metal–organic perovskites, where molecular constituents may be used to enhance the chances of obtaining polar structures and achieve couplings to orbital and magnetic orderings3. perovskite ferroelectrics that are entirely metal free have now been reported4 with ordering temperatures and magnitudes of spontaneous polarization comparable to those of batio3. even when the molecular constituents of the metal–organic perovskite themselves lack a dipole moment, their inclusion in crystal structures can still form an important part of the design strategy for novel improper ferroelectric materials5.now, writing in nature materials, miao and colleagues6 report the design and synthesis of a ferroelectric material that operates at the intersection of these two paradigms. mimicking the conventional approach of local inversion-symmetry breaking, they exploit in their design the ringlike molecule 15-crown-5, whose geometry cannot support an inversion centre (fig. 1c). on settling into a single conformation at low temperature, these cyclic ethers collectively break the glide-plane symmetry of the high-temperature centrosymmetric structure, giving rise to a bulk polarization. but this broken symmetry also allows for a secondary effect involving a sliding of the rings that induces a further improper ferroelectric contribution to the polarization (fig. 1d). both contributions are additive along a direction normal to the ring planes, one reinforcing the other. this microscopic mechanism is supported by a combination of variable-temperature crystallographic measurements and density functional theory calculations.the generation of polarization oriented normal to the layering axis of the [cd(15-crown-5)][cd2cl6] structure is better suited to device applications than the in-plane polarization generated by typical hybrid improper ferroelectrics. this is because most ferroelectric device architectures operate with fields applied perpendicular to the flat surfaces of a layered sample. here it is also the case that the out-of-plane polarization has allowed direct measurement of ferroelectric hysteresis in a bulk sample — something that has been difficult to achieve for many hybrid improper ferroelectrics and layered systems. moreover, by applying a field bias using a piezo force microscope, miao and colleagues show that it is possible to flip the polarization of small domains, demonstrating direct external control over the sense of crown-ether ring orientations and direction of layer sliding in this responsive material.thinking beyond this specific system, further opportunities may exist to couple ring motions in metal–organic materials to novel kinds of ferroelectric order. recent experimental evidence of unidirectional molecular spins in metal–organic frameworks7 and computational predictions of cooperative rotations in porous framework materials8 suggest a further route to ferroelectricity. while molecules such as 15-crown-5 possess a dipole moment described by a polar vector, a non-polar molecule spinning dynamically in a concerted manner breaks symmetry in a way that is described by an axial vector (fig. 2a). such axial vectors are used to describe magnetic moments (that is, electron spins) and hence the same systematic symmetry-based design rules (fig. 2b) used for predicting improper ferroelectric states based on magnetic order9 could help envisage further mechanisms by which polar distortions may be induced and enhanced using molecular spin.a, a rotating molecule breaks symmetry in a manner captured by an axial vector parallel to the rotation axis (red arrows). b, specific patterns of axial vector order can break inversion symmetry, such as in the example of collinear antiferromagnetic order shown here. blue and grey arrows conventionally represent electron spin, but might equally well describe the sense of molecular spin.whether or not metal–organic ferroelectrics based on molecular spin order can be developed, the observation by miao and colleagues6 of switchable ferroelectric polarization in van der waals materials is a notable step towards functional device application. particularly exciting is that the improper contribution to the polarization is normal to the layering axis, which helps when applying an electric field to switch polarization in device architectures. further work will be required to enhance the magnitude of the ferroelectric response, and to replace cadmium with less toxic alternatives such as calcium or magnesium. however, the versatile chemistry of this class of materials, and the broad scope for a variety of symmetry-breaking mechanisms to be at play, make this a particular promising area of research.bousquet, e. et al. nature 452, 732–736 (2008).cas article google scholar benedek, n. a. & fennie, c. j. phys. rev. lett. 106, 107204 (2011).article google scholar stroppa, a. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 50, 5847–5850 (2011).cas article google scholar ye, h.-y. et al. science 361, 151–155 (2018).cas article google scholar boström, h. l. b., senn, m. s. & goodwin, a. l. nat. commun. 9, 2380 (2018).article google scholar miao, l.-p. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01322-1 (2022).article google scholar danowski, w. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 14, 488–494 (2019).cas article google scholar evans, j., krause, s. & feringa, b. l. faraday discuss. 225, 286–300 (2021).cas article google scholar senn, m. s. & bristowe, n. c. acta crystallogr. a 74, 308–321 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry, university of warwick, coventry, ukmark s. senninorganic chemistry laboratory, university of oxford, oxford, ukandrew l. goodwinyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to mark s. senn or andrew l. goodwin.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssenn, m.s., goodwin, a.l. polarization from sliding molecular rotors. nat. mater. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01334-xdownload citationpublished: 04 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01334-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 