three-dimensional computing systems made of vertically integrated complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor circuits and layered resistive memory can perform analogue computing-in-memory with high energy efficiency.you have full access to this article via your institution.artificial intelligence (ai) based on convolutional neural networks (cnns) is of use in many practical applications, including computer vision, natural language processing and medical diagnosis. however, as the complexity of cnn tasks increases, so do the number of weights used. as a result, memories denser than what current static random-access memory technologies can provide are required. one option is multi-level resistive random-access memory (rram). however, while multi-level rrams offer high density, in conventional von neumann architectures, a bottleneck exists as storage-class rram has to be accessed in a row-by-row manner and is physically separate from compute engines. computing-in-memory architectures aim to address this issue by embedding computation within memory, thereby reducing excessive data transfer and enhancing the energy efficiency of the ai hardware1. non-volatile resistive devices such as rram can naturally support computing-in-memory operations2. in particular, when multiple rows of a rram array are turned on simultaneously, the weighted sum current between the word-line voltage (representing cnn activations) and rram conductance (representing cnn weights) produces a multiply-and-accumulate (mac) result.previous rram-based computing-in-memory approaches have typically used a two-dimensional rram crossbar array with one-transistor–one-resistor (1t1r) rram bit-cells and integrated complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (cmos) driver/readout circuits at the periphery of the rram array3,4. as the rram crossbar array and the peripheral circuits do not physically overlap, the peripheral circuits often dominate the overall rram computing-in-memory macro area5, which diminishes the density benefits of rram devices. one technology that can address this is three-dimensional (3d) integration, where multiple layers of a rram array and peripheral circuits are vertically stacked. this approach reduces the front-end-of-line (feol) area, and also reduces the on-chip interconnect. three-dimensional stacking with vertical rram has been demonstrated previously6,7, but peripheral circuits — which are essential components of computing-in-memory systems — were not integrated. writing in nature electronics, xinghua wang, feng zhang and colleagues now report an eight-layer computing-in-memory architecture that consists of vertically integrated rram arrays and peripheral circuits, and is fabricated using a 55 nm cmos process8.the researchers — who are based at the institute of microelectronics of chinese academy of sciences, beijing institute of technology, guangdong university of technology, xiamen university of technology, the university of electronic science and technology of china, and the national tsing hua university — used an interface-type structured 3d vertical rram technology where the entire device area is active6, unlike most conductive filament-type 2d rram. for 3d integration, the vertical rram bit-cell should not include a transistor — the cmos feol layer is dedicated to the peripheral circuit architecture — so a self-selective 3d rram bit-cell was used, where the rram resistance was programmed into four levels. the multi-level self-selective 3d vertical rram uses a pillar and planar electrode architecture (fig. 1). throughout the 3d rram array, multi-layered metal planes and vertically penetrating metal pillars work as word-lines and bit-lines, respectively. a barrier layer is employed between the pillar and plane to achieve uniformly distributed conductance levels with a nanoampere current range. these multi-level rram cells achieve higher density and fast mac operation, but can be susceptible to conductance drift. to avoid error accumulation caused by conductance drift, which can lead to cnn accuracy degradation, an anti-drift scheme was developed where the current is sequentially read through word-lines. the current is further stabilized through current shaping, and the mac computation is finished by combining near-memory multi-bit analogue multiplication with the digital processing unit.three-dimensional model of the 3d vertical rram used for computing-in-memory operation. the current output from the resistive crossbar array connects to current-amplitude-discrete-shaping (cads), analogue multiplier (am) and direct-small-current-converter (dscc) circuits and, finally, an accumulator to effectively alleviate the bit-line (bl) current overlap and ensure accurate mac results, thus improving the inference accuracy. sm, sensing margin; ssc, self-selective cell; wl, word-line; ibl, bit-line current. figure reproduced with permission from ref. 8, springer nature ltd.to enhance the sensing margin, a current-amplitude-discrete-shaping circuit was developed, which converts the continuous bit-line currents into discrete fixed values. such a scheme overcomes the problem of error accumulation caused by the conductance drift of rram devices in conventional rram-based computing-in-memory schemes, thus illustrating that 3d vertical rram can perform high-precision computing. the sampled and amplified current is measured by a current-mode 8-bit successive approximation register analogue-to-digital converter to quantize the partial mac value. the 3d computing-in-memory macro can be configured with activation/weight precision values of 1-bit/2-bit, 4-bit/5-bit and 8-bit/9-bit for mac operations, and achieves an energy efficiency of 62.11 tera-operations per second per watt (tops w−1), 29.94 tops w−1 and 8.32 tops w−1 at the corresponding precision values, respectively. the 3d integration enables a high bit-density of 58.2 bit μm−2, and the capabilities of the 3d macro were evaluated by image-recognition tasks with the mnist and cifar-10 datasets and by edge-detection tasks using 3d brain mri data.the work by wang, zhang and colleagues is an important step towards a non-volatile 3d computing system that fully integrates multiple vertical rram layers with custom cmos peripheral circuits. the 3d vertical rram system includes only a 2 kb rram, so larger-scale integration is an important next step and will require difficulties in 3d manufacturing and device variability to be overcome. with such advances, this technology could be used to run complex ai and cnn models on edge devices that have particular size, weight and power constraints. applications including intelligent robots/drones, smart wearable systems and personalized healthcare devices could, in particular, benefit from this technology.verma, n. et al. ieee solid state circuits mag. 11, 43–55 (2019).article google scholar ielmini, d. & wong, h.-s. p. nat. electron. 1, 333–343 (2018).article google scholar chen, w.-h. et al. nat. electron. 2, 420–428 (2019).article google scholar chang, m. et al. in 2022 ieee int. solid-state circ. conf. (isscc) 1–3 (ieee, 2022); https://doi.org/10.1109/isscc42614.2022.9731679yin, s., sun, x., yu, s. & seo, j.-s. ieee trans. electron dev. 67, 4185–4192 (2020).article google scholar luo, q. et al. in 2017 ieee int. electron dev. meeting (iedm) 2.7.1–2.7.4 (ieee, 2017); https://doi.org/10.1109/iedm.2017.8268315lin, p. et al. nat. electron. 3, 225–232 (2020).article google scholar huo, q. et al. nat. electron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00795-x (2022).download referencesschool of electrical, computer and energy engineering, arizona state university, tempe, az, usainjune yeo & jae-sun seoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jae-sun seo.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsyeo, i., seo, js. resistive memories stack up. nat electron 5, 414–415 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00804-zdownload citationpublished: 26 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00804-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 