sea level rise causes barrier islands to migrate landward. coastal evolution modelling reveals a centennial-scale lag in island response time and suggests migration rates will increase by 50% within the next century, even if sea level were to stabilize.you have full access to this article via your institution.barrier islands are narrow, sandy strips of land backed by shallow coastal bays, which often hold considerable economic and societal importance. being only a few metres above sea level, they are dynamic, changing with the wind, waves and tides. as sea level rises, storm waves reach higher on the landscape causing many barrier islands to migrate landward over time. how barrier islands respond to a change in the rate of sea level rise has been long-debated. writing in nature geoscience, mariotti and hein1 report on results from a new version of mariotti’s powerful, spatially explicit coastal evolution model, coastmorpho2d2, revealing that modern rates of barrier island retreat are controlled by the speed of sea level rise during past centuries, rather than by the current rate. this lag in island response means that barrier islands will retreat much faster in the future, even if sea level rise were to cease.given the increasing pace of sea level rise over the last century, there has been growing concern for the future of barrier islands. traditional understanding suggests that migration rates should be proportional to the local rate of sea level rise divided by the average slope of the substrate across which islands are migrating3,4. yet, recent observational studies show that even as sea level rise rates have increased, the speed of island migration has remained relatively constant5, even for coastlines unaffected by management practices6. this lack of observed acceleration in coastal retreat despite increasing sea level rise over the last 50–100 years, is an incongruence that has sparked curiosity.much has been learned about barrier island behaviour over longer time periods using geologic approaches to study the past 18,000 years of sea level rise7. however, because island migration processes are erosional and therefore remove all but the most recent geologic evidence of past behaviour, and because the details of future conditions are uncertain and will be different from those of the past, understanding future island change requires the use of computer models. such models have demonstrated the importance of underlying substrate stratigraphy, erodibility8 and slope9; shoreface dynamics10; and the interplay between dune and island dynamics11.as the first spatially explicit model to simulate the whole coastal system over centuries and millennia, mariotti and hein’s coastmorpho2d is a critically important new tool. while most barrier island models include the assumption that islands respond rapidly to changes in the rate of sea level rise (that is, display a quasi-equilibrium response, or a response tied to a prescribed equilibrium), mariotti and hein’s approach does not. rather, it explicitly represents sediment transport processes from waves and currents without any reference to a presumed equilibrium. this, along with the holistic nature of the model, allows the authors to investigate the transient response of barrier islands to changing sea level rise rates in new ways.the simulations reveal a century-scale lag in barrier island response to sea level rise, which can explain the lack of observed acceleration in recent coastal retreat. the lag occurs because as sea level rise accelerates, it takes time for the coastal system to adjust; time for what mariotti and hein call ‘geomorphic capital,’ to be used up. essentially, under a regime of rising sea level, the coastal system is continually chasing equilibrium by adjusting its shape and extent, which requires time.a key strength of the modelling framework — its seamlessly coupled treatment of multiple wave and current processes across the coastal system during and between storms — can at the same time make it difficult to identify the mechanisms behind the lag in barrier island migration rate. mariotti and hein1 point to a handful of geometric properties that contribute to geomorphic capital and delay migration. for example, the height and width of a barrier island must be sufficiently reduced by sea-level rise before sediment can be overwashed from the front of the island to the back, constituting migration (fig. 1). in the model, island height and width decrease relatively rapidly, but other elements of geometric capital adjust more slowly. for example, as the rate of sea-level rise increases, back-barrier bays gradually tend to deepen, thereby increasing tidal flow and enlarging tidal channels. as a migrating island eventually encounters these deeper channels, more overwash sediment is required to fill them and migration rates ultimately increase as a result. these initial, partial explanations for the lag in island response raise fascinating questions and create exciting directions for future work designed to elucidate the different aspects of geomorphic capital and how they interact.© gordon campbell / atatltitudegallery.comwide overwash fans in the foreground extend into the marsh and tidal channels on the backside, while the more distant half of the island has been narrowing.the insights that arise from mariotti and hein’s1 holistic approach to modelling the coastal barrier system represent potentially ground-breaking contributions that could change how we think about the future of barrier island landscapes. the idea that island migration rates will take on the order of a century to catch up to current sea level rise rates has significant implications for coastal management and the future of coastal habitation. this recent work of mariotti and hein alerts us to the importance not only of understanding the mechanisms underlying the lag, but also to the importance of including this lag when modelling barrier island systems, especially when model results are likely to provide guidance for management decisions.mariotti, g. & hein, c. nat. geosci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00980-9 (2022).mariotti, g. j. geophys. res.-earth surf. 126, e2020jf005867 (2021).article google scholar swift, d. j. p. sediment. geol. 14, 1–43 (1975).article google scholar moore, l. j. & murray, a. b. (eds) barrier dynamics and response to changing climate, (springer international publishing, 2018).hapke, c. j., kratzmann, m. g. & himmelstoss, e. a. geomorphology 199, 160–170 (2013).article google scholar deaton, c. d., hein, c. j. & kirwan, m. l. geology 45, 123–126 (2017).article google scholar mallinson, d. et al. in barrier dynamics and response to changing climate (eds moore, l. j. & murray, a. b.) 91-120 (springer, 2018).stolper, d., list, j. h. & thieler, e. r. mar. geol. 218, 17–36 (2005).article google scholar moore, l. j., list, j. h., williams, s. j. & stolper, d. j. geophys. res. earth surf. 115, f03004 (2010).article google scholar lorenzo-trueba, j. & ashton, a. d. j. geophys. res. earth surf. 119, 2013jf002941 (2014).article google scholar reeves, i. r. b., moore, l. j., murray, a. b., anarde, k. a. & goldstein, e. b. geophys. res. lett. 48, e2021gl092958 (2021).article google scholar download referencesuniversity of north carolina, chapel hill, department of earth, marine and environmental sciences, chapel hill, nc, usalaura j. mooreduke university, division of earth and ocean sciences, durham, nc, usaa. brad murrayyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to laura j. moore or a. brad murray.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmoore, l.j., murray, a.b. islands on the move. nat. geosci. 15, 602–603 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-01000-6download citationpublished: 04 august 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-01000-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 