multistep mechanosensing of lymphocyte infiltration and proliferation by the remodeling stroma and matrix underlies the immensely rapid and massive tissue expansion by lymph nodes in response to immune challenge.you have full access to this article via your institution.lymph nodes (lns) mediate the rendezvous of immune cells throughout the body to enable spatiotemporally resolved interactions essential to immune response. how the appropriate spatial compartmentalization of cellular niches and tactical guidance cues provided by ln stromal compartments is maintained during the massive expansions that lns undergo in response to an immune challenge has remained elusive, however. in this issue of nature immunology, assen et al.1 and horsnell et al.2 use ex vivo and in situ mechanical measurements and manipulations in acute immune challenge and genetic models to show that rapid spatiotemporal remodeling of the ln structure is regulated by the sensing of local mechanical cues that result from cellular influx and proliferation (fig. 1). complementary analyses provided by these studies also elucidate how cellular-scale mechanics manifest in emergent tissue-scale mechanics that are implicated in regulating the immune-modulatory functions of both quiescent and reactive lns.influx and proliferation of lymphocytes during an immune challenge create internal pressure within the fibroblastic reticular cell (frc) network and the whole organ, driving ln expansion. (i) in the homeostatic state, the frc network is under basal tension levels and spacing. (ii) during an immune challenge, frc network space is increased owing to the pressure generated by local lymphocyte packing. however, tension on the network is mainly carried by the conduits, and frcs are in a state of relaxation. (iii) after a delay of a few days, while some conduits become fractured, cells are stretched and carry the tension in the network. (iv) in the next stage, frcs proliferate and expand the network size to enable restoration of homeostatic levels of network spacing and tension. (v) at the last stage, further expansion of the ln is restricted by increased thickness and stiffness of the capsule at the organ periphery.ln swelling, referred to clinically as lymphadenopathy, is a hallmark of an ongoing adaptive immune response and is widely used in physical examination for the clinical diagnosis of infectious diseases. remarkably, the hierarchical structure of the lns is meticulously preserved during these extraordinarily rapid (several hours to days) and large (~2–10-fold increase in organ volume) changes—unique among mature adult organs—which necessitate active remodeling of the stromal network. failure of this remodeling response has been implicated in the pathophysiology of several diseases, including repetitive ischemia–reperfusion kidney injury and hiv infection, as well as other infectious diseases3,4. this not only implicates the stromal architecture’s crucial role in an effective adaptive immune response, but also suggests that a sensitive feedback mechanism exists between ln immunological reactivity and the biomechanical response of the lns.the ln stroma consists of a three-dimensional matrix network of collagen fibrils secreted and ensheathed by fibroblastic reticular cells (frcs) that form a conduit connected to the ln capsule at its outer edge. this stromal network not only contributes to the mechanical structure of the ln, but also enables transport of lymph, along with soluble antigens, through the acellular conduit lumen. the stroma also regulates the migration, retention, survival and interaction of different immune cells, including dendritic cells and t lymphocytes, by secreting specific chemokines (such as ccl19 and ccl21) and cytokines (such as interleukin-7)3. therefore, understanding of the regulation of stromal network remodeling, along with its immunoregulatory properties, during this immense volumetric expansion of lns holds crucial insights for the inherent control mechanisms of adaptive immunological responses to infectious diseases and cancer.although the stromal network was conventionally regarded as a passive structural scaffold, it is now understood to play an active and integral role in immune regulation during ln expansion through physical and biochemical means. frc relaxation induced by mature, antigen-presenting dendritic cells enables stretching of the stromal network and increases the space available to rapidly homing and proliferating t lymphocytes, resulting in ln swelling5,6. signals that drive frc relaxation inhibit matrix deposition by frcs and, along with stretching of already existing underlying ecm fibers due to tissue expansion, result in local disruption of lymph conduits, albeit with preserved overall network connectivity and conduit size-exclusion barrier function7. frcs also drive the volumetric expansion of lns through proliferation, which expands the overall size of the stromal network8,9. although various biochemical signals have been implicated in frc proliferation3, observations of preserved ratios of frcs and lymphocytes during ln swelling and of the capacity of frc network to expand in the absence of inflammatory signals or activated dendritic cells have hinted at an alternative mechanism that is triggered and regulated by microenvironmental mechanical forces9. now, experimental evidence of frc sensitivity to the mechanical microenvironment, homogeneous proliferation of frcs throughout the ln and failed stromal network adaptation to ln swelling by mechanically quiescent frcs, provided by assen et al.1 and horsnell et al.2, demonstrates the existence of mechanosensory feedback mechanisms regulating the stromal network remodeling that occurs in reactive lns.at the initial stages of ln swelling, both studies report increased internetwork spacing despite decreased or similar network tension compared to that of quiescent lns. alignment and local disruption of conduit collagen fibers, along with decreased percentages of phosphorylated myosin regulatory light chains in frcs, indicate that, in the initial stages of the swelling response, tension in the network is mainly carried by the collagen fibrils within the ln conduits, concurrently with an initial relaxation of frcs1,2. after a few days, as the ln continues to swell in response to immune challenge, both the frc cytoskeletal and overall network tension increase substantially, and this is accompanied by enhanced proliferation of frcs in a manner uniformly distributed throughout the ln1,2. these results from intact lns are also supported by in vitro observations of increased frc proliferation on stiffer substrates2. the fact that the frc proliferation is not limited to specific niches, such as around the high endothelial venules that mediate lymphocyte influx from the circulation, but is homogeneous throughout the organ implies that the expansion of the stromal network is induced and regulated by mechanosensory feedback from frcs in response to local forces generated as a result of the influx and proliferation of immune cells. genetic ablation of talin1, an adapter molecule of integrin signaling1, and podoplanin, a mucin-type transmembrane protein controlling actomyosin contractility2, in frcs resulted in decreased ln expansion, increased network gap and attenuated network tension, emphasizing that the mechanosensory feedback mechanism of frcs plays a crucial role in stromal network remodeling and ln swelling. horsnell et al2. also provided in vitro evidence of decreased membrane tension and more rapid cell volume expansion of frcs upon binding with the podoplanin receptors, which are presented by mature dendritic cells in the ln, supporting the concepts that the cellular level mechanisms regulate the ln expansion and preserve the network connectivity during the process. two weeks after immunization, when the lns were still substantially expanded, assen et al.1 measured homeostatic levels of stromal network spacing, conduit alignment and network tension, despite significantly higher effective resistance of the bulk organ. this discrepancy at the late stage of ln response to the immune challenge was ascribed to significantly increased capsule thickness and stiffness, highlighting the spatiotemporal synchronization of multi-scale stromal components in the regulation of ln swelling (fig. 1).these reports reveal a new biomechanical mechanism additional to those resulting from fluid flow, which were known to regulate lymphatic tissue development10,11 and functioning12. both studies identify lymphocyte influx and proliferation within lns in response to immune challenge as the main source of pressure that stretches the stromal network to result in remodeling and ln expansion. lymphocyte-packing-induced stretching of the tissue is then sensed by cytoskeletal mechanics of a cellular meshwork of fibroblasts, as well as by the ln collagen matrix in conduit fibrils and capsule, via a multistep process (fig. 1). whether altered fluid loads and subsequent local changes in pressure and shear forces within lymphatic tissues during immune response can trigger these mechanosensing mechanisms, and whether these mechanisms are also involved in the fluidic effects on stroma-regulated lymphocyte migration, remain unknown. indeed, draining lns with deficient lymphatic function showed a loss of normal stromal architecture in an experimental transgenic model of lymphedema13, a pathology due to disrupted flow to the ln and associated with deficient or altered adaptive immune response. tertiary lymphoid structures — ectopic lymphoid organs that are commonly observed in chronic inflammatory diseases, including cancer, and resemble the lns in terms of structure and composition, but are non-encapsulated temporary organs — represent interesting comparative candidates in which to study the effect of different stromal components on the regulation of adaptive immunity in future. how these mechanosensing processes contribute to pathology, for example in the context of ln fibrosis associated with chronic infection or cancer, also remains to be elaborated, as does their role in the return to homeostatic ln size after resolution of the immune response, which again requires remodeling of the stromal network14.assen, f. p. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01257-4 (2022).article pubmed google scholar horsnell, h. l. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01272-5 (2022).article pubmed google scholar krishnamurty, a. t. & turley, s. j. nat. immunol. 21, 369–380 (2020).cas article google scholar o'melia, m. j., lund, a. w. & thomas, s. n. iscience 22, 28–43 (2019).article google scholar acton, s. e. et al. nature 514, 498–502 (2014).cas article google scholar astarita, j. l. et al. nat. immunol. 16, 75–84 (2015).cas article google scholar martinez, v. g. et al. cell rep. 29, 2810–2822.e2815 (2019).cas article google scholar li, l., wu, j., abdi, r., jewell, c. m. & bromberg, j. s. trends immunol. 42, 723–734 (2021).cas article google scholar yang, c.-y. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 111, e109–e118 (2014).cas pubmed google scholar bovay, e. et al. j. exp. med. 215, 2760–2777 (2018).cas article google scholar sweet, d. t. et al. j. clin. invest. 125, 2995–3007 (2015).article google scholar wiig, h. & swartz, m. a. physiol. rev. 92, 1005–1060 (2012).cas article google scholar thomas, s. n. et al. j. immunol. 189, 2181–2190 (2012).cas article google scholar gregory, j. l. et al. cell rep. 18, 406–418 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesgeorge w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering, georgia institute of technology, atlanta, ga, usayunus alapan & susan n. thomasparker h. petit institute for bioengineering and bioscience, georgia institute of technology, atlanta, ga, usayunus alapan & susan n. thomaswallace h. coulter department of biomedical engineering, georgia institute of technology and emory university, atlanta, ga, usasusan n. thomaswinship cancer institute, emory university, atlanta, ga, usasusan n. thomasyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to susan n. thomas.reprints and permissionsalapan, y., thomas, s.n. mechanics drive lymph node expansion. nat immunol 23, 1139–1141 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01277-0download citationpublished: 26 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01277-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 