inhibition of xpo1-mediated nuclear export by selinexor represents a promising therapeutic strategy in acute myeloid leukemia. because xpo1 is not specific for tumor-suppressive proteins, selinexor may also activate pro-oncogenic processes. a study now shows that inhibition of selinexor-induced, purinergic receptor–mediated akt activation potentiates its anti-leukemic activity.you have full access to this article via your institution.cellular homeostasis requires the proper and balanced nuclear–cytoplasmic export of large molecules, a process often deregulated in cancer. exportin-1 (xpo1; also known as crm1) is the main export receptor responsible for the nuclear–cytoplasmic transport of hundreds of nuclear export signal–containing proteins and multiple rna species1. xpo1 is frequently overexpressed and/or mutated in human cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (aml), which is associated with a poor prognosis and chemoresistance2,3,4. proteomics studies have identified hundreds of xpo1 substrates in human cells, including several tumor-suppressor proteins such as p53, brca1/2, npm1, foxo and rb12, which require nuclear localization to serve their functions but are frequently dislocated to the cytoplasm in cancer cells. suppression of xpo1 by selective inhibitors of nuclear transport, such as selinexor (kpt-330), thus represents a promising therapeutic strategy. however, xpo1 is not specific for proteins with tumor-suppressive activity, and inhibition of xpo1 is likely to engage numerous cellular programs simultaneously. thus, treatment with selinexor may also induce oncogenic pro-fitness effects in cancer cells that limit its anti-cancer activity. in this issue of nature cancer, lin et al. report that selinexor treatment activated pro-survival, pi3kγ–dependent akt signaling in aml through transcriptional upregulation of the purinergic receptor p2y25. co-inhibition of akt signaling potentiated the anti-leukemic effects of selinexor in aml cell lines, primary aml samples ex vivo, and syngeneic as well as patient-derived xenograft (pdx) mouse models, which suggests that the clinical activity of selinexor may be substantially improved through inhibition of akt.blockade of the nuclear–cytoplasmic transport mechanism as a therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment has gained increased interest in recent years. selinexor is a first-in-class, orally bioavailable selective inhibitor of nuclear transport that is approved by the us food and drug administration for the treatment of multiple myeloma and diffuse large b cell lymphoma6. selinexor has been studied in multiple early-phase clinical trials in solid and hematological cancers, including aml7. in patients with relapsed or refractory aml, selinexor was found to be tolerable and active, inducing complete responses in a substantial fraction of patients7. nuclear retention and thus activation of key tumor-suppressor proteins has been postulated as the primary mechanism of action for xpo1 inhibitors, and diverse preclinical studies have demonstrated that inhibition of nuclear export promotes cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in aml cells8,9. however, many known oncoproteins, such as snail, cyclins, tert/telomerase, survivin and yap1, are also exported by xpo1;10 this leaves open the possibility that selinexor treatment may also activate pro-oncogenic processes, which would limit its efficacy in cancer cells.to address that question, lin et al. applied systematic screening approaches to identify pro-fitness pathways induced by selinexor5. they started with a focused crispr–cas9-based loss-of-function screen in the aml cell line oci-aml2 to identify genetic sensitizers (i.e., genes whose loss potentiated selinexor effects) and resisters (i.e., genes whose loss reduced selinexor effects). gene-ontology analysis identified pi3k–akt and pten signaling as strongly enriched signatures among sensitizer and resister genes. the gene encoding pten, which has an inhibitory role in the pi3k–akt pathway, ranked as the top resister gene in selinexor-treated cells. in contrast, pik3cg and pik3r5, which encode the catalytic and regulatory subunits p110γ and p101 of pi3kγ (fig. 1), were identified as strong selinexor sensitizers. in addition, pdpk1, which encodes the effector protein pdk1 (phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1), located downstream of pi3k, and rictor, mtor and mapkap1, which encode components of the akt-activating mtorc2 complex, as well as akt2 and akt3, scored as sensitizers. these findings highlight the pi3k–akt pathway as a modifier of selinexor efficacy.in aml cells, selinexor treatment induces pro-fitness effects through transcriptional upregulation of p2y2. p2y2, gβγ g proteins and ras-family proteins induce recruitment of pi3kγ to the cell membrane, thereby eliciting enzyme activation. active pi3kγ converts phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate (pip2) to phosphatidylinositol-(3,4,5)-trisphosphate, which serves as a docking site for pdk1. pdk1 phosphorylates akt at thr308. ser473 phosphorylation, introduced by mtorc2, stabilizes thr308 phosphorylation, which results in full akt activation. akt activity promotes cell growth and survival, among others, by inducing phosphorylation of the pro-apoptotic protein bad at ser136, thus inhibiting its activity. through the co-application of akt inhibitors with selinexor, akt activity is abolished, bad is activated and apoptosis is induced in aml cells. nes, nuclear export signal. created with biorender.com.next, to delineate the signaling nodes activated by selinexor treatment, lin et al. used a reverse-phase protein array covering 160 (phosphorylated) epitopes representing cellular growth, proliferation and signaling pathways5. thr308 and ser473 of akt were identified as top selinexor-induced phosphorylation sites, and this was validated by xpo1-knockdown experiments. to determine the mechanism of selinexor-induced phosphorylation of akt, the authors aimed to identify genes that were necessary for akt activation and were upregulated in response to selinexor. in an elegant flow cytometry–based crispr–cas9 loss-of-function screen with akt phosphorylated at thr308 (pthr308) as a readout for selinexor activity, the distribution of sgrnas in pthr308-negative and pthr308-positive cell populations was analyzed through deep sequencing and was compared with that of vehicle- treated cells. gene-ontology analysis again highlighted pi3k–akt-related pathways, with akt1 and akt2 as positive modifiers and pten as a negative modifier. in addition, g protein–coupled receptor signaling, represented by p2ry2, and pik3cg and pik3r5 were identified as positive modifiers of akt activation. of note, p2ry2 mrna, which encodes the purinergic receptor p2y2, was found to be upregulated after selinexor treatment (fig. 1), indicative of its contribution to selinexor-induced akt activation. the p101 regulatory subunit of pi3kγ, encoded by pik3r5, facilitates reception of signaling inputs from g protein–coupled receptors, which mechanistically links p2y2 and pi3kγ in selinexor-induced akt activation (fig. 1). knockdown of p2ry2 abolished akt signaling, whereas ectopic overexpression of p2ry2 induced akt phosphorylation. for activation of pi3ky, its catalytic subunit p110γ must associate with activated gtpase ras11. gtp-ras levels were increased in selinexor-treated aml cells, as demonstrated by precipitation of the raf1 (ras effector molecule)–ras binding domain. when p2y2 was pharmacologically inhibited or p2ry2 expression was reduced by short hairpin rna, gtp-ras levels dropped, which demonstrates that p2y2 was required for selinexor-induced activation of ras. simultaneous knockdown of nras and kras (which encode highly related ras protein isoforms) abolished akt activation after selinexor treatment. these functional experiments suggested akt as a therapeutic target that potentiates selinexor’s anti-leukemic effects.to test that hypothesis, lin et al. treated aml cell lines, primary patient samples and syngeneic and pdx mouse models with akt inhibitors such as mk-2206 or ipatasertib, in combination with selinexor5. inhibition of akt enhanced selinexor-induced cleavage of the dna-repair enzyme parp and caspase-3 and increased apoptosis in aml cell lines. analysis of selinexor–ipatasertib drug interaction in primary aml samples revealed additive and synergistic interactions, and the combination strongly reduced the colony-formation potential of primary aml samples compared with the effects of either agent alone, with minimal effects on healthy cord blood–derived cd34+ cells. in vivo, selinexor plus ipatasertib significantly increased overall survival in a syngeneic mll-af9 mouse model, as well as in oci-aml2 xenograft and pdx mouse models, compared with the effect of either drug alone. of note, the combination of selinexor and ipatasertib outperformed standard chemotherapy (cytarabine plus doxorubicin), as well as the combination of selinexor plus chemotherapy, in mll-af9 mice. finally, the authors demonstrated a 29-fold decrease in the frequency of leukemia-initiating cells in secondary recipients of mll-af9 blasts from donor mice treated with selinexor plus ipatasertib compared with that of secondary recipients of blasts from donor mice treated with cytarabine plus doxorubicin. this strikingly demonstrated the ability of selinexor plus ipatasertib to kill leukemia-initiating cells, a prerequisite for an efficacious and durable response.although selinexor-induced pro-survival signaling downstream of p2y2 was comprehensively characterized in the study of lin et al.5, the mechanism of selinexor-induced upregulation of p2ry2 mrna remains unclear. little is known about the transcriptional regulation of p2ry2. the proximal promoter of p2ry2 has been described as containing three potential binding sites for the transcription factor c/ebpβ (ccaat/enhancer-binding protein β), and c/ebpβ has been shown to induce upregulation of p2ry2 during inflammation in intestinal epithelial cells12. as c/ebpβ has been previously identified as a client protein of xpo113, treatment with selinexor might sequester c/ebpβ in the nucleus and thereby foster the expression of c/ebpβ target genes, including p2ry2. mass spectrometry analyses of separated nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins in cells treated with selinexor or vehicle, and p2ry2 promoter-binding studies could shed light on the mechanisms that regulate selinexor-induced p2ry2 expression. as xpo1 also has a major role in the nuclear export of multiple rna species, including micrornas, modulation of post-transcriptional regulation of p2ry2 mrna by selinexor is conceivable as well. regulation of purinergic signaling by micrornas has been described in various pathological conditions14. thus, selinexor might block the export of selective micrornas responsible for destabilizing p2ry2 mrna and thereby increase p2ry2 expression.in summary, the work by lin et al.5 adds to the understanding of the complex mechanism of nuclear–cytoplasmic transport and the mode of action of selinexor in aml. moreover, using the example of selinexor, the authors highlight the important, but thus-far-overlooked, concept of pro-fitness effects induced by drugs that target fundamental cellular pathways, such as nuclear export, proteasomal degradation, chromatin regulation or translation. beyond inhibiting certain oncogenic players, others could be stimulated simultaneously, which would limit the drugs’ anti-cancer activity. it is increasingly acknowledged that not all on-target effects of anti-cancer drugs contribute to their efficacy. indeed, in many instances, even targeted therapies may encompass pleiotropic effects, which reduce their efficacy. modulation of targeted therapies to maximize intended outcomes while minimizing detrimental effects could develop into an established approach for enhancing therapy efficacy. at this time, combination cancer therapies are still empirically established in most cases. however, a relevant study demonstrated that in combination therapy that combines drugs with independent modes of action, patients benefit mainly from the drug to which their tumor is most sensitive, with no added benefit from the other component(s)15. this suggests that the design of optimal combination treatments should be based on maximizing the chance of response to at least one drug15. thus, integrative genomic approaches, as demonstrated here by lin et al.5, in combination with large-scale drug screening may have the potential to identify combinations of rational, synergistic drug partners for the design of more-effective anti-cancer therapies.hutten, s. & kehlenbach, r. h. trends cell biol. 17, 193–201 (2007).cas article google scholar tan, d. s., bedard, p. l., kuruvilla, j., siu, l. l. & razak, a. r. cancer discov. 4, 527–537 (2014).cas article google scholar kojima, k. et al. blood 121, 4166–4174 (2013).cas article google scholar taylor, j. et al. cancer discov. 9, 1452–1467 (2019).cas article google scholar lin, k. h. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00394-x (2022).article pubmed google scholar kasamon, y. l. et al. oncologist 26, 879–886 (2021).cas article google scholar azizian, n. g. & li, y. j. hematol. oncol. 13, 61 (2020).article google scholar etchin, j. et al. leukemia 27, 66–74 (2013).cas article google scholar ranganathan, p. et al. blood 120, 1765–1773 (2012).cas article google scholar fu, s. c., huang, h. c., horton, p. & juan, h. f. nucleic acids res. 41, d338–d343 (2013).cas article google scholar vadas, o. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 110, 18862–18867 (2013).cas article google scholar degagné, e., turgeon, n., moore-gagné, j., asselin, c. & gendron, f. p. febs j. 279, 2957–2965 (2012).article google scholar buck, m., zhang, l., halasz, n. a., hunter, t. & chojkier, m. embo j. 20, 6712–6723 (2001).cas article google scholar guo, j. et al. purinergic signal. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11302-022-09840-y (2022).article pubmed google scholar palmer, a. c. & sorger, p. k. cell 171, 1678–1691.e1613 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of medicine v - hematology, oncology and rheumatology, university hospital heidelberg, heidelberg, germanystefanie göllner & carsten müller-tidowmolecular medicine partnership unit, european molecular biology laboratory and university of heidelberg, heidelberg, germanycarsten müller-tidownational center for tumor diseases, heidelberg, germanycarsten müller-tidowyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to stefanie göllner or carsten müller-tidow.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsgöllner, s., müller-tidow, c. akting on xpo1 inhibition in aml. nat cancer 3, 787–789 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00395-wdownload citationpublished: 26 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00395-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 