necroptosis is a form of regulated necrosis in which ripk3 is activated by binding to rip homotypic interaction motif (rhim)-containing proteins. now, researchers describe a non-canonical pathway of ripk3 activation that is triggered by osmotic stress and nhe1-mediated cytosol alkalinization. this previously undescribed mechanism of osmotic stress-induced necroptosis might have implications for treating cancer and other diseases.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to zhang, w. et al. osmotic stress activates ripk3/mlkl-mediated necroptosis by increasing cytosolic ph through a plasma membrane na+/h+ exchanger. sci. signal. 15, eabn5881 (2022).pathways of regulated necrosis include necroptosis, ferroptosis and pyroptosis1, of which necroptosis is the best characterized. receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase-3 (ripk3) phosphorylates the pseudokinase mixed-lineage kinase-domain-like protein (mlkl), which executes necroptosis by membrane disruption1. canonical ripk3 activation is mediated by interactions with the rip homotypic interaction motif (rhim)-containing proteins ripk1, tir domain-containing adaptor molecule 1 (ticam1, also known as trif) and z-dna-binding protein-1 (zbp1, also known as dai), which lead to autophosphorylation and oligomerization of ripk3 (fig. 1). now, zhang et al. report that cytosol alkalization induces non-canonical activation of ripk3-mediated necroptosis, which is independent of ripk3 binding to ripk1, ticam1 or zbp1, but dependent on mlkl phosphorylation2. using a genome-wide crispr–cas9 screen, the researchers identified slc9a1, which encodes na+/h+ exchanger-1 (nhe1), as the only gene involved in osmotic stress-induced necroptosis that does not belong to the canonical necroptosis pathway. in cells cultured with high concentrations of nacl or sucrose to increase osmolality, nhe1 increased cytosolic ph and promoted ripk3 autophosphorylation and necroptosis, whereas pharmacological inhibition of nhe1 prevented osmotic stress-induced necroptosis. furthermore, increased intracellular ph was sufficient to activate ripk3. these findings identify a non-canonical pathway for ripk3 activation and further increase the complexity of mechanisms known to drive necroptosis.top, canonical activation of receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase-3 (ripk3) is mediated by binding to one of the rip homotypic interaction motif (rhim)-containing proteins ripk1, tir domain-containing adaptor molecule 1 (ticam1) and z-dna-binding protein-1 (zbp1). binding of ripk3 to ripk1 occurs in response to activation of tumour necrosis factor receptors (tnfrs), binding to ticam1 is induced by activation of toll-like receptors (tlrs), and binding to zbp1 occurs in response to the presence of z-rna as a result of viral infection. activated ripk3 phosphorylates mixed-lineage kinase-domain-like protein (mlkl), which disrupts the cell membrane, resulting in necroptosis. bottom, non-canonical activation of ripk3 occurs in response to activation of the cell membrane na+/h+ exchanger 1 (nhe1) and increased intracellular ph. this pathway has been observed in osmotic stress-induced cell death and requires the kinase domain (kd) of ripk3 (ref.2). a mutant ripk3 protein that lacked the rhim domain could induce necroptosis in response to increased intracellular ph. the molecular connection between an alkaline intracellular milieu, and ripk3 activation and necroptosis is unclear; however, cytosolic alkalization has been linked to activation of rho-associated protein kinase (rock) and ripk3, and necrosis3,4.the next question was, how does an alkaline intracellular environment activate ripk3? a high ph could potentially promote a conformational change in the rhim domain that mimics protein binding upstream of the necroptosis pathway. however, deletion of the rhim domain of ripk3 did not affect osmotic stress-induced mlkl phosphorylation and necroptosis2. by contrast, deletion of 10 amino acids in the kinase domain of ripk3 prevented mlkl phosphorylation in response to osmotic stress, identifying the kinase domain as essential for osmotic stress-induced necroptosis. in an acidic extracellular ph, ripk1 is inhibited by protonation of key histidine residues of the kinase domain, suggesting that ripk3 activation in an alkaline environment could be mediated by deprotonation of these histidine residues. however, the researchers were unable to identify key histidine residues with roles in activation of ripk3 by high ph.ripk3 might be activated by unknown upstream proteins that are recruited in an alkaline intracellular ph. in human induced pluripotent stem cells, overexpression of nhe1 and consequent cytosolic alkalization induced necrotic cell death through sustained activation of rho-associated protein kinase (rock), although the targets of rock were not identified3. in addition, interaction between rock and ripk3 promoted tissue injury in a rat model of myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion4. thus, the hypothesis that rock could be an upstream activator of ripk3 in an alkaline environment should be explored. furthermore, ripk3 can promote kidney inflammation in acute kidney injury in a necroptosis-independent but kinase domain-dependent manner5; it would be interesting to investigate whether intracellular ph and nhe1 are involved in this process.zhang at el. also report that an alkaline intracellular environment promotes the death of ripk3-expressing colon cancer cells2. however, intracellular alkalization is a survival mechanism of numerous cancer cell types6, and strategies to reduce intracellular ph, including using nhe1 inhibitors, have been investigated as anticancer therapies. the magnitude of the intracellular ph change that triggers necroptosis might differ from that of the ph change that triggers proliferation7, or the response to an intracellular alkaline environment might be cell type-specific. the findings might also be relevant for non-tumour cells. mediators of kidney injury, such as angiotensin ii and aldosterone, activate nhe1 in kidney cells8. furthermore, the nhe1 inhibitor cariporide reached phase 3 clinical development for ischaemic heart disease following reports that it protected cultured cardiomyocytes from cell death induced by oxidative stress, or hypoxia and reoxygenation. despite promising results, clinical development of cariporide was stopped because of safety concerns, as the treatment was associated with an increase in cerebrovascular events9. the nhe1 inhibitor rimeporide is currently being tested in a clinical trial to prevent muscle damage in patients with duchenne muscular dystrophy (nct02710591). necroptosis activation should thus be examined in studies in which nhe1 was targeted for tissue protection.the new findings are also potentially relevant to hyperosmolality-induced tissue injury. the extracellular environment of mammalian cells is characterized by an effective osmolality (dependent on solutes that do not cross cell membranes easily such as electrolytes and glucose) of around 290–300 mosm kg−1. the most common cause of hyperosmolality is hypernatraemia. an acute increase in sodium to >160 meq l−1 (that is, an effective osmolality >325 mosm kg−1) can lead to brain shrinkage and severe symptoms such as altered mental status, lethargy, coma and seizures, whereas chronic hypernatraemia ( >24 h) is associated with adaptive changes that limit its negative impact. the osmolarity of extracellular fluid is maintained within safe limits through the combined action of thirst and the capacity of the kidney to concentrate urine, which means that kidney tubular epithelial cells are exposed to up to 1,200 mosm kg−1. zhang et al. report that osmotic stress induced by an acute increase in extracellular osmolality to >500–800 mosm kg−1 elicited necroptosis2. under physiological conditions, such high osmolarity would only be found in the kidney medulla. in the healthy kidney, medullary tubular cells are protected from hyperosmolality despite their high expression of nhe1. however, these cells might become sensitized to hyperosmolality by an adverse microenvironment triggered by kidney disease. vasopressin (also known as antidiuretic hormone) increases medullary and urine hyperosmolarity and has been associated with progression of chronic kidney disease. in patients with toxic conjunctivitis, disruption of the tear lipid layer by preservatives in multidose eye drops results in increased tear film evaporation, which may lead to increased tear hyperosmolality (potentially to the very high levels studied by zhang et al.) and osmotic stress on the ocular surface epithelium, including the cornea10. other examples of the very high levels of osmolality shown to induce necroptosis are difficult to find.in conclusion, zhang et al. have characterized a molecular pathway of ripk3 activation and subsequent necroptosis resulting from a nhe1-mediated rise in intracellular ph. this work sheds new light on the modulation of necroptosis in cancer and non-cancer cells.linkermann, a., stockwell, b. r., krautwald, s. & anders, h. j. regulated cell death and inflammation: an auto-amplification loop causes organ failure. nat. rev. immunol. 14, 759–767 (2014).cas article google scholar zhang, w., fan, w., guo, j. & wang, x. osmotic stress activates ripk3/mlkl-mediated necroptosis by increasing cytosolic ph through a plasma membrane na+/h+ exchanger. sci. signal. 15, eabn5881 (2022).cas article google scholar wakabayashi, s. et al. overexpression of na+/h+ exchanger 1 specifically induces cell death in human ips cells via sustained activation of the rho kinase rock. j. biol. chem. 294, 19577–19588 (2019).cas article google scholar sharifi, m. et al. necroptosis and rhoa/rock pathways: molecular targets of nesfatin-1 in cardioprotection against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury in a rat model. mol. biol. rep. 48, 2507–2518 (2021).cas article google scholar martin-sanchez, d. et al. bone marrow-derived ripk3 mediates kidney inflammation in acute kidney injury. j. am. soc. nephrol. 33, 357–373 (2022).cas article google scholar zheng, t., jäättelä, m. & liu, b. ph gradient reversal fuels cancer progression. int. j. biochem. cell biol. 125, 105796 (2020).cas article google scholar lagadic-gossmann, d., huc, l. & lecureur, v. alterations of intracellular ph homeostasis in apoptosis: origins and roles. cell death differ. 11, 953–961 (2004).cas article google scholar lins, b. b., casare, f. a. m., fontenele, f. f., gonçalves, g. l. & oliveira-souza, m. long-term angiotensin ii infusion induces oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress and modulates na+ transporters through the nephron. front. physiol. 12, 642752 (2021).article google scholar mentzer, r. m. jr et al. sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibition by cariporide to reduce the risk of ischemic cardiac events in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting: results of the expedition study. ann. thorac. surg. 85, 1261–1270 (2008).article google scholar hamrah, p. & dana, r. toxic conjunctivitis. uptodate https://www.uptodate.com/contents/toxic-conjunctivitis (2022).download referencesthe authors have received funding from fis/fondos feder: pi19/00588, pi19/00815, instituto de salud carlos iii (isciii) ricors2040 (rd21/0005/0001), financiado por la unión europea – nextgenerationeu and mecanismo para la recuperación y la resiliencia (mrr). a.b.s. has received salary support from the ramon y cajal program.laboratorio de nefrología experimental, instituto de investigación sanitaria-fundacion jimenez diaz, universidad autonoma de madrid, madrid, spainalberto ortiz & ana b. sanzredes de investigación cooperativa orientadas a resultados en salud (ricors)2040, madrid, spainalberto ortiz & ana b. sanzdepartment of medicine, universidad autonoma de madrid, madrid, spainalberto ortizinstituto reina sofia de investigaciones nefrologicas (irsin), madrid, spainalberto ortizyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to alberto ortiz or ana b. sanz.a.o. has received grants from sanofi and consultancy or speaker fees or travel support from advicciene, astellas, astrazeneca, amicus, amgen, fresenius medical care, gsk, bayer, sanofi-genzyme, menarini, mundipharma, kyowa kirin, alexion, freeline, idorsia, chiesi, otsuka, novo-nordisk, sysmex and vifor fresenius medical care renal pharma, and is director of the catedra mundipharma-uam of dkd and the catedra astrazeneca-uam of ckd and electrolytes. a.b.s. declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsortiz, a., sanz, a.b. a pathway of osmotic stress-induced necroptosis. nat rev nephrol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-022-00607-7download citationpublished: 01 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41581-022-00607-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 