transposon-associated transposase b (tnpb) is the putative ancestor of cas nucleases. a tnpb-based adenine base editor has now been developed that is small enough to be loaded into a single aav vector without compromising editing activity.you have full access to this article via your institution.the emergence of genome-editing technology using crispr–cas9/cas12 nucleases has revolutionized many areas of research, including life sciences, biotechnology and medicine, because of its ease of use and ability to precisely edit dna. however, the application of crispr–cas in curing genetic diseases remains challenging, with one main obstacle being the lack of efficient in vivo delivery methods. although adenoassociated virus (aav) can efficiently express the dna cargo with relatively low genetic toxicity, its packaging capacity (up to around 4.7 kb) is insufficient for crispr-based genome editing tools with larger size such as base editors (bes) or prime editors (pes)1. in this issue of nature chemical biology, kim et al.2 report the development of small-sized bes through the engineering of transposon-associated transposase b (tnpb), which is small enough to be loaded into a single aav along with its guide rna (grna).recent studies reporting that crispr nuclease-mediated dna cleavage can generate unforeseen safety concerns, such as the p53-mediated dna response, large deletions and/or chromosomal rearrangements, have made bes — which consist of the inactive form of the crispr nuclease or nickase fused to nucleoside deaminases, such as cytidine deaminase or adenosine deaminase (creating cbes and abes, respectively), and can bypass such issues3 — increasingly attractive. however, the large size of bes makes them difficult to load, along with their grnas, into a single aav, which would be desirable given that aav is approved by the us food and drug administration for use in gene therapy. alternatively, a dual-aav system can be used to deliver split cbes or abes, but this approach also has limitations due to potential combinatorial safety concerns as well as relatively low delivery efficacy4.in this regard, researchers have attempted to identify compact cas9/cas12 orthologs compatible with a single aav vector, and attention has focused on cas12f because of its small size (400–700 amino acids). cas12f (also known as cas14), a family of compact rna-guided nucleases from uncultivated archaea, has been shown to have double-stranded dna cleavage activity5. the kim group previously demonstrated cas12f-mediated gene editing in eukaryotic cells by intensively remodeling its grna6. another study further reported on the development of small bes that use cas12f, which can be delivered with a grna in a single aav vector7.in line with these efforts, kim et al.2 subsequently developed a small rna-guided nuclease using tnpb, a member of the is200/is605 transposon family8. previous studies of tnpb from deinococcus radiodurans isdra2 (isdra2tnpb) revealed a conserved ruvc-like active site9 and, concomitantly, a programmable rna-guided dna endonuclease activity10, suggesting that tnpb may be an ancestor of cas nucleases. however, using isdra2tnpb to create bes was difficult because tnpb has low editing activity in mammalian cells. taking a hint from the fact that tnpb has a very similar nucleotide sequence to cas12f1 except for 5′-terminal 28 amino acid residues, kim et al.2 developed a method they named tnpb/augment rna-based genome editing technology (target) that employs tnpb and the engineered (augment) grnas designed for cas12f. target shows greater efficiency than editing involving other tnpb families such as isdra2 tnpb and amatnpb. when combined with adenosine deaminase, target could also provide abe function. through intensive optimization experiments, kim et al2. found an appropriate combination of the tnpb and the adenosine deaminase dimer, generating target-abe, and expanded the targetable sites beyond the canonical tttr protospacer-adjacent motif (pam) through modification of the pam preference. the small size of target-abe enabled the packaging of two different grnas together with target-abe into a single all-in-one aav vector (fig. 1) without compromising the editing efficiency of target-abe.the small size of tnpb allows it to be packaged into a single aav vector along with two grnas.despite some controversy regarding safety, aav is thought to be the most efficient means of delivery for genome-editing tools, and there has been a significant effort to develop small-sized genome editing tools. this study is a part of that endeavor, and kim et al2. were successful in developing a target-abe that is small enough to be loaded into a single aav vector. however, several potential problems remain with the further application of target as a general genome editing tool. target is not effective when combined with cbe for c-to-t conversion, and target-abe has a grna-dependent dna off-target effect, which would present a major obstacle to its use in medical applications. moreover, the lack of the nickase form of tnpb might prevent the future presentation of prime editors. nevertheless, this study provides great insights toward the development of novel rna-guided nucleases derived from bacteria, archaea and huge bacteriophages for use in genome editing. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to demonstrate tnpb-based gene editing and base editing in mammalian cells with high efficiency, which opens up the possibility that tnpb could be enlisted as part of various types of gene-editing tools in the future. furthermore, this success will expand the scope of genome-editing technology involving less well known systems in addition to the crispr system.andrew, v. a., luke, w. r. & liu, d. r. nat. biotechnol. 38, 824–844 (2020).article google scholar kim, d. y. et al. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01077-5 (2022).article pubmed google scholar jeong, y. k., song, b. & bae, s. mol. ther. 28, 1938–1952 (2020).cas article google scholar colella, p., ronzitti, g. & mingozzi, f. mol. ther. methods clin. dev. 8, 87–104 (2018).cas article google scholar wu, z. et al. nat. chem. biol. 17, 1132–1138 (2021).cas article google scholar kim, d. y. et al. nat. biotechnol. 40, 94–102 (2021).article google scholar xu, x. et al. mol. cell 81, 4333–4345 e4 (2021).cas article google scholar siguier, p., perochon, j., lestrade, l., mahillon, j. & chandler, m. nucleic acids res. 34, d32–d36 (2006).cas article google scholar kapitonov, v. v., makarova, k. s. & koonin, e. v. j. bacteriol. 198, 797–807 (2015).article google scholar karvelis, t. et al. nature 599, 692–696 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesresearch institute for convergence of basic sciences, hanyang university, seoul, south koreabeomjong songdepartment of biomedical sciences, seoul national university college of medicine, seoul, south koreasangsu baedepartment of biochemistry and molecular biology, seoul national university college of medicine, seoul, south koreasangsu baeyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to sangsu bae.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssong, b., bae, s. voyage to minimal base editors. nat chem biol 18, 920–921 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01101-8download citationpublished: 01 august 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01101-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 