a modelling study suggests that the proposed energetic barrier between prokaryotes and eukaryotes may not be relevant to the complexity gap between the two domains. the energetic advantage of early mitochondria was probably small, and eukaryotes likely emerged without the help of an endosymbiont.you have full access to this article via your institution.there is an enormous complexity gap between modern day prokaryotes and eukaryotes, with only the latter achieving profoundly different organizations such as endosymbioses or complex multicellularity. this gap has been stimulating researchers since the dawn of bacteriology and more systematically since the conception of prokaryotes and eukaryotes as structurally distinct but evolutionarily continuous domains by stanier and van niel1. the fact that prokaryotes have only bridged this gap once without leaving intermediates (as far as we know) suggests that hidden barriers such as available cellular energy prevent another independent major transition of this kind. but what if the enormous gap is only apparent after around 2 billion years of evolution and if prokaryotes are actually much less constrained by their bioenergetics? writing in nature ecology & evolution, schavemaker and muñoz-gómez present a mathematical model that suggests that the energetic gap may be much smaller than previously thought (fig. 1), which has far-reaching consequences2.there is a clear complexity gap between modern prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but the underlying causes are unknown. a, there may be an insurmountable energetic barrier between the two domains (the ‘gap’), making transitions from prokaryotes impossible without some extra energetic boost (normal arrows indicate evolutionary change). perhaps only mitochondrial endosymbionts (red cell; dashed arrow indicates acquisition) could support the required energetic boost to actually transit the gap3 (thick arrow). b, alternatively, there is no energetic barrier, and the two complexity domains overlap, as the study of schavemaker and muñoz-gómez suggests2. stepwise evolution of novel features could allow a transition to the eukaryotic domain without mitochondria. however, the overlap is likely relatively small, making it still a rare and unlikely evolutionary scenario.in an earlier study, lane and martin argued that the gap is the result of an underlying energetic divide, attributable to the different cellular architectures of prokaryotes and eukaryotes3. moreover, those authors suggested that the gap could only have been bridged by the acquisition of an endosymbiont that increased power per gene or genome to hundreds or thousands of times more than prokaryotic organization enables3. although criticized4,5, lane and martin argued that mitochondria not only represent the cause behind the present gap, but they must have been the first step of eukaryogenesis, releasing the energetic constraint, as without them genome expansion and eukaryotic complexification could not have proceeded3.however, the existence of the undeniable complexity limit does not necessarily imply an energetic barrier and even less so implies that the barrier is impassable without mitochondria. the coincidence of mitochondriogenesis with eukaryogenesis is suggestive of such a causal link, but temporal correlation does not always entail evolutionary causation. all major eukaryotic features (mitochondria, nucleus, phagocytosis, endomembranes, etc.) seem to have evolved during the same obscure period spanning from the most distant to the most recent common ancestors of eukaryotes, leaving no clues of intermediates or a clear order of appearance6.the new analyses of schavemaker and muñoz-gómez explicitly test the hypothesis of lane and martin, focusing on respiratory membrane size and genetic design. they show that the genomic architecture of modern eukaryotes (singular host genome and multiple reduced symbiont genomes) is advantageous in comparison to that of modern prokaryotes (who must maintain multiple genomes as the cell size increases). their results are consistent with the idea that endosymbiont-based metabolic compartmentalization scales better with volume than purely prokaryotic solutions. however, they suggest that the advantage of modern eukaryotes is only three-fold, compared to 200,000-fold as claimed by lane and martin3. although a threefold difference could have conferred a substantial early relative advantage, the important question is not (and never was) what level of complexity could be reached with mitochondria, but rather with less streamlined versions — or without them at all.assuming that at the onset of mitochondrial integration, prokaryotic partners were qualitatively more alike (as mitochondria-early scenarios assume), schavemaker and muñoz-gómez show that the energetic difference in terms of dna cost savings between the partners entirely disappears. there was probably no insurmountable discontinuity between the scaling of cell energy with volume at the onset of mitochondriogenesis, as implied by lane and martin3, and the advantage of eukaryotic organization paid off only at a considerably later stage. these results support alternative hypotheses to account for the complexity gap we see today and for why prokaryotes have traversed it only once. these hypotheses either do not invoke a major energetic boost conveyed by early mitochondria or assume that mitochondria came late.a major consequence of their results is that prokaryotic complexity may be limited by something other than energetics. also, the potential lack of an energetic barrier between prokaryotes and eukaryotes would imply that prokaryotes could have gradually evolved to a (proto-)eukaryotic state, with minor adaptations yielding sufficient relative advantage over competitors. moreover, the transition may not have relied on mitochondria enabling eukaryotic complexification, but the other way around: gradual prokaryotic complexification enabled the capture of mitochondria later in the process. mitochondria-late theories postulate a nucleated and/or phagocytotic host before endosymbiotic capture7,8.admittedly, no structure remotely comparable to a nucleus is known in the prokaryotic domain. however, the bacterium candidatus uab amorphum has a mechanism that is functionally equivalent to, but independent of, eukaryotic phagocytosis, capable of capturing other cells9. it proves that it is possible to evolve and maintain a complex, thought-to-be exclusively eukaryotic feature on prokaryotic hardware, despite claims about it being costly and untenable10. phagocytosis is an almost too perfect solution for the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria, as it can readily provide the means, motivation and opportunity for the host to capture a partner.why was the mitochondrion initially necessary then, if not for energetics? this question is inherently flawed. rather, one should ask: what was its immediate benefit when engulfed? evolution does not invest into the future but brings out the best from a situation at hand. phagocytosis provides immediate ecological benefits: one can eat one’s neighbour11,12 and may even store it for poor times13, providing a relative advantage over competitors.perhaps mitochondria were not indispensable for the emergence, maintenance and evolution of early eukaryotic features (phagocytosis included). maybe the host was a phagotroph (eukaryotes may be ancestrally phagocytotic14), and phagocytosis was the means of mitochondrial inclusion (as it was for practically all other unicellular endosymbionts). it is also possible that mitochondria came before phagocytosis and that phagocytosis evolved multiple times independently in early eukaryotes15. however, the fact that a form of phagocytosis occurs in a prokaryote makes it a more parsimonious first candidate for endosymbiosis than the spontaneous merging of syntrophic prokaryotes that mitochondria-early scenarios assume16. while theoretically possible, no example of the latter is known17, which is all the more intriguing because syntrophic mutualisms are extremely common among prokaryotes.the discovery of prokaryotic phagocytosis has made the bacterial group planctomycetes once again the focus of investigation into eukaryotic origins18. further studies need to include both asgard archaea and bacteria, rather than just focusing on the potential archaeal origin of eukaryotes. energetic calculations need to be fine tuned with more realistic assumptions, but the ultimate goal is to engineer prokaryotic partnerships of syntrophic or phagotrophic engagements in the lab to explicitly test ecological predictions. while both these interactions are unlikely and observably rare candidates for prokaryotic endosymbiosis, they fit the bill for the exceptionally rare (well, singular) eukaryogenesis. as the alleged energetic gap between prokaryotes and eukaryotes diminishes, it becomes more likely that step-by-step complexification occurred before the acquisition of mitochondria.stanier, r. y. & van niel, c. b. arch. mikrobiol. 42, 17–35 (1962).cas article google scholar schavemaker, p. e. & muñoz-gómez, s. a. nat. ecol. evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01833-9 (2022).article google scholar lane, n. & martin, w. f. nature 467, 929–934 (2010).cas article google scholar lynch, m. & marinov, g. k. pnas 112, 15690–15695 (2015).cas article google scholar cavalier-smith, t. & chao, e. e. protoplasma 257, 621–753 (2020).cas article google scholar zachar, i. & szathmáry, e. biol. direct 12, 19 (2017).article google scholar cavalier-smith, t. cold spring harb. perspect. biol. 6, 1–31 (2014).article google scholar de duve, c. nat. rev. genet. 8, 395–403 (2007).article google scholar shiratori, t., suzuki, s., kakizawa, y. & ishida, k. nat. commun. 10, 5529 (2019).article google scholar martin, w. f., tielens, a. g. m., mentel, m., garg, s. g. & gould, s. b. microbiol. mol. biol. rev. 81, 8–17 (2017).article google scholar jékely, g. biol. direct 2, 3 (2007).article google scholar stanier, r. y. some aspects of the biology of cells and their possible evolutionary significance. organization and control in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. in proc. 20th symposium of the society for general microbiology (eds charles, h. p. & knight, b. c. j. g) 20, 1–38 (cambridge university press, cambridge, 1970).zachar, i., szilágyi, a., számadó, s. & szathmáry, e. pnas usa 115, e1504–e1510 (2018).cas pubmed pubmed central google scholar burns, j. a., pittis, a. a. & kim, e. nat. ecol. evol. 2, 697–704 (2018).article google scholar bremer, n., tria, f. d. k., skejo, j., garg, s. g. & martin, w. f. genome biol. evol. 14, evac079 (2022).article google scholar imachi, h. et al. nature 577, 519–525 (2020).cas article google scholar zachar, i. & boza, g. cell. mol. life sci. 77, 3503–3523 (2020).cas article google scholar devos, d. p. mol. biol. evol. 38, 3531–3542 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesinstitute of evolution, mta centre for ecological research, budapest, hungaryistván zacharyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to istván zachar.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionszachar, i. closing the energetics gap. nat ecol evol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01839-3download citationpublished: 01 august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01839-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 