n-heterocycles are valuable motifs in pharmaceuticals and materials, but divergent synthetic strategies are lacking. now, bifunctional sulfilimines have been shown to form nitrogen-centred radicals under photocatalytic conditions, and subsequent coupling with olefins enables the synthesis of diverse n-heterocycles.you have full access to this article via your institution.the incorporation of nitrogen atom(s) into pharmaceutical lead compounds can often drastically alter their molecular properties to bring forth the intended physiological effects1. hence, it is perhaps not surprising that a staggering 60% of all fda-approved medicines contains at least one nitrogen atom in a cyclic form, collectively referred to as n-heterocycles2. cross-coupling reactions and buchwald–hartwig amination have revolutionized methods for the synthesis of n-heteroaromatics — ‘flat’ n-heterocycles — via c–c and c–n bond formations. saturated (or partially saturated) n-heterocycles containing non-planar sp3-hybridized atoms have recently been suggested to be better pharmaceutical lead scaffolds compared with unsaturated compounds3. however, strategies for the syntheses of molecules with increased saturation have so far largely relied on intramolecular cyclization, which can be difficult to apply when trying to access structural diversity (fig. 1a).a, current intramolecular strategies to access n-heterocycles. b, challenges encountered in intermolecular olefin difunctionalization for n-heterocycle synthesis. c, synthesis of n-heterocycles by coupling bifunctional sulfilimines with alkenes under photoredox conditions. d, proposed mechanism for the reaction between bifunctional sulfilimines and alkenes, via a nitrogen-centred radical b. dbt; dibenzothiophene. e, selected examples of the newly developed reaction.intermolecular alkene difunctionalization is known for the rapid assembly of molecular complexity and access to structural diversity, and so represents an ideal strategy for constructing n-heterocycles. however, limited modular strategies based on olefin difunctionalization exist for the synthesis of saturated n-heterocycles. this can be attributed to, in some respects, the surprisingly ambiphilic nature of the alkene. considering this, the coupling of an alkene to a dinucleophilic reagent requires the addition of an oxidant to balance the polarity mismatch, whereas coupling to a dielectrophilic reagent would require an additional reducing agent (fig. 1b). with respect to atom economy, dipolar reagents are ideal if their stability and synthesis are not a concern. however, this is often not a given, as providing the presence of both oppositely charged species in the same entity can be challenging. now, writing in nature chemistry, tobias ritter and co-workers report the synthesis and reactivity of highly stable dibenzothiophene-based bifunctional sulfilimines4. under photoredox conditions, these reagents can alternate between radical and polar pathways to engage in intermolecular cyclization with olefins, enabling access to a diverse array of n-heterocycles (fig. 1c).ritter and colleagues have recently popularized the use of thianthrenium salts in a series of seminal works5. the stability, synthetic robustness and versatility of these reagents are simply remarkable. several prominent challenges in late-stage site-selective c–h functionalization such as trifluoromethylation, alkylation, vinylation, tritiation, amination, to name a few, have been overcome using these reagents. despite spectacular initial success, these reagents have largely been limited to monofunctionalization reactions; in other words, useful only for one single bond formation. their capacity in multi-bond-forming cyclative processes, particularly towards n-heterocycle synthesis, remains largely unknown. to fill this conceptual void, ritter and colleagues have now developed the concise and modular syntheses of a range of stable and bifunctional sulfilimines with pendant nucleophiles. in contrast to traditional dipolar reagents, these bifunctional sulfilimines can undergo both radical and polar processes under photoredox conditions. the outcome is a cyclization process that allows the modular synthesis of n-heterocycles using simple alkenes as coupling partners.the proposed mechanism (fig. 1d) fully captures the versatility of photoredox catalysis to traverse between radical and polar processes. the addition of a lewis acid, bi(otf)3, is found to be crucial for the reactivity of the sulfilimines for several reasons. first, it increases the reduction potential of the sulfilimine significantly via the generation of the zwitterionic adduct a, which can participate in rapid oxidation by the photocatalyst excited state, iriii*. the lewis acid, in lieu of normally electrophilic protecting groups, renders the resulting nitrogen-centred radical b appropriately electrophilic for the ensuing olefin addition. the resulting carbon radical c can then undergo a radical-to-polar crossover event with iriv to close the photocatalytic cycle. the final step is cyclization of the cation d by the pendant nucleophile to afford the desired n-heterocycle product. the lewis acid ties up the basic amine functionality, which can be released on workup. the presence of various intermediates was probed and validated by cyclic voltammetry, uv-visible spectrometry and stern–volmer quenching experiments, in addition to radical clock reagents.importantly, this reaction forms n-heterocyclic products with the amine functionality unmasked, which is a striking feat in n-heterocycle synthesis as it removes the need for a potentially challenging deprotection step. a diverse range of alkenes were studied and found to form a range of morpholine products. endocyclic alkenes give access to morpholine derivatives with fused rings, while exocyclic alkenes produce spirocyclic morpholines (fig. 1e). in certain cases, excellent stereoselectivity is observed with the appropriate substitution pattern on the sulfilimines. excitingly, simple variation of the pendant nucleophile affords a diverse range of n-heterocycles, such as oxazepanes, piperazines, oxazolines and dihydroimidazopyridiniums, vastly contrasting traditional strategies where usually only one class of n-heterocycle is produced. the successful incorporation of ‘drug like’ pyridine, pyrimidine and triazine motifs in the sulfilimines is a further testament to its future adoptability in both pharmaceutical industries and academic settings. additionally, harnessing resonance-based reactivity illustrates other potential pathways for future reaction discoveries.another exciting feature of the seminal discovery of these sulfilimines is their prospect of becoming ‘off-the-shelf’ commercial chemicals. if realized, along with the memorable snap/slap reagents6 and the vinyl sulfonium reagents7, the sulfilimine reagents from ritter and colleagues will significantly broaden a medicinal chemist’s toolbox in streamlining n-heterocycle syntheses. the use of electrophilic sulfur reagents for polarity inversion is undoubtedly becoming an exciting field for reaction discovery. for example, an alternative strategy that has been recently developed shows the use of thianthrene radical cations to invert the alkene to a dicationic intermediate, solving a long-standing challenge in n-alkyl aziridine synthesis8.asymmetric synthesis of saturated n-heterocycles remains an area with unmet needs, and future studies will likely encounter several challenges. given the sustained presence of the lewis acid in the key steps of the reaction, asymmetric induction based on chiral lewis acids seems logical for future investigation, when rendered catalytic. any archetype of olefin cyclization reactions will inevitably draw comparisons to the venerable diels–alder reaction, where atom economy is theoretically perfect. ritter and co-workers have taken a first step towards addressing this issue with near-quantitative recovery of the dibenzothiophene reagent. furthermore, access to structural diversity depends on broadening the substrate scope of both the sulfilimines and the alkenes. with that said, the discovery of a mode of reactivity facilitating direct access to a diverse range of privileged and unprotected n-heterocycles is undoubtedly welcome and exciting news for scientists working in this field.richter, m. f. et al. nature 545, 299–304 (2017).cas article google scholar vitaku, e., smith, d. t. & njardarson, j. t. j. med. chem. 57, 10257–10274 (2014).cas article google scholar lovering, f., bikker, j. & humblet, c. j. med. chem. 52, 6752–6756 (2009).cas article google scholar cheng, q., bai, z., tewari, s. & ritter, t. nat. chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00997-y (2022).article pubmed google scholar berger, f. & ritter, t. synlett 33, 339–345 (2022).cas article google scholar vo, c.-v. t., mikutis, g. & bode, j. w. angew. chem. int. ed. 52, 1705–1708 (2013).cas article google scholar yar, m., mcgarringle, e. m. & aggarwal, v. k. angew. chem. int. ed. 47, 3784–3786 (2008).cas article google scholar holst, d. e., wang, d. j., kim, m., guzei, i. a. & wickens, z. k. nature 596, 74–79 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencestwitter: @weililabdepartment of chemistry and biochemistry, the university of toledo, toledo, oh, usaprabagar baskaran & wei liyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to wei li.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbaskaran, p., li, w. radical ring formation. nat. chem. 14, 850–852 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01006-ydownload citationpublished: 25 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01006-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 