malleicyprols are highly reactive polyketides responsible for virulence in some pathogenic bacteria. now, the enzyme that constructs the cyclopropanol warhead of malleicyprols has been identified. this enzyme could represent a useful target for developing new antivirulence therapeutics.you have full access to this article via your institution.there is a relentless need for the development of novel antibiotics as treating infections with antibiotics places selective pressures on pathogens, inevitably leading to antibiotic resistance1. screening for compounds that, rather than inhibiting bacterial growth, target bacterial virulence pathways has been suggested as an alternative approach to address infections2. this antivirulence approach disarms bacteria of key proteins and toxins required for establishing infection. contrary to antibiotics, antivirulence drugs avoid imposing the selective pressures that propagate antibiotic resistance. therefore, these drugs could prove remarkably valuable in reducing the severity of antibiotic-resistant infections.among some of the most severe antibiotic-resistant infections is melioidosis, which is estimated to cause ~90,000 deaths annually3. the disease, which is endemic to tropical regions of the world, often manifests as an acute infection that can progress to septicemia and requires an intensive and prolonged antibiotic treatment regimen. the causative agent is a soil-dwelling gram-negative bacterium burkholderia pseudomallei. the severity of melioidosis is largely attributed to the immense arsenal of b. pseudomallei virulence factors, including those that promote invasion, immune evasion, persistence, and antibiotic resistance3. the present infeasibility of vaccination against melioidosis, coupled with the intensity of the infection, renders b. pseudomallei a high-threat pathogen. developing antivirulence drugs for b. pseudomallei could potentially minimize the suffering and fatalities caused by the bacterium.members of the burkholderia genus possess a well-conserved biosynthetic gene cluster essential to virulence called bur/mal4. when the bur/mal cluster is activated, the pathogen synthesizes malleicyprols, lethal compounds decorated with a reactive cyclopropanol group5. cyclopropanol can undergo single-electron oxidation and ring opening, generating a β-keto radical that has the potential to wreak havoc on the cell. while it was determined that the cyclopropanol warhead confers virulence activity to the malleicyprols, its assembly mechanism was elusive until now. writing in nature chemistry, a team led by christian hertweck and michael groll has structurally and mechanistically characterized the enzyme that generates the cyclopropanol group — burg, yielding a potential target for developing an antivirulence drug to combat melioidosis6.it was a major challenge to discover the cyclopropanol synthase since no biosynthetic pathways to cyclopropanol were known and no clear candidate enzymes were present in the bur/mal cluster. without any leads, it was first necessary to knock out each uncharacterized bur/mal gene and survey the effects on the metabolome. taking note of precursor accumulation, the group not only identified burg as the key enzyme in warhead production, but also identified the immediate precursor to cyclopropanol formation — (2r,3r)-gonydiol. analysis of burg sequence homology revealed that the enzyme is a relative of the ketol-acid reductoisomerase (kari) family, whose members are involved in branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis in central metabolism7. these karis are bifunctional mg2+-dependent enzymes that catalyse alkyl migration and nadph-dependent reduction (fig. 1a). the phylogeny would therefore suggest burg catalyses a metal-coordinated redox reaction.a, a canonical kari enzyme. a mg2+-dependent kari enzyme catalyses alkyl migration (r = me or et) via a cyclopropane-like transition state and reduces the resulting intermediate with nadph 7. b, burg in malleicyprol biosynthesis. the mg2+-dependent burg uses an active-site glutamate (glu 232) and nad+ to oxidize gonydiol, generating an enolate intermediate. formation of the cyclopropanol ring (green) generates dms, and nadh then reduces the intermediate to regenerate nad+ (highlighted in yellow). c, cmac in coronatine biosynthesis. the zn2+-dependent cmac catalyses cyclopropanation of a chlorinated intermediate bound to the peptidyl carrier protein (pcp), cmad 9. d, gnmy in guangnanmycin biosynthesis. the acc synthase, gnmy, utilizes s-adenosyl methionine (sam) and catalyses a plp-dependent cyclopropanation with elimination of mta 10.next, the team set upon elucidating the burg mechanism. they discovered that burg is a cyclopropanol synthase that represents a rare example of an enzyme that recycles its nad+ cofactor (fig. 1b). to elucidate this mechanism, the team crystallized burg with a set of kari inhibitors and gonydiol analogues; this approach essentially provided snapshots of each step of the enzyme’s mechanism. in the proposed mechanism, the substrate gonydiol (deprotonated at its α-hydroxyl and complexed between two magnesium ions) is deprotonated at its c-β position by an active-site glutamate (e232) and oxidized at its c-α position with nad+ to form a stabilized enolate (fig. 1b). the cyclopropanol ring is then generated with release of dimethylsulfide (dms), and the c-α position is reduced by nadh to regenerate nad+.an in vitro assay of burg with gonydiol confirmed that the enzyme requires nad+ (not nadh) to produce the cyclopropanol product. furthermore, burg was able to reduce the substrate surrogate hydroxypyruvate with nadh, providing evidence for the second redox step in the reaction mechanism, which regenerates nad+. a co-crystal structure of burg with a carba analogue of gonydiol (in which the sulfur in the sulfonium group is replaced with a carbon) was able to capture the enzyme after it had oxidized the analogue, such that the enzyme was bound to a trapped enolate and nadh. this structure confirmed that the mechanism likely proceeds through an enolate intermediate and provided further evidence that the enzyme generates nadh transiently.the active-site glutamate (e232) in burg plays a key role in both binding the sulfonium group of the gonydiol substrate through ionic interactions and facilitating enolate formation (fig. 1b). mutating this glutamate inhibited cyclopropanation, but did not hinder nadh-dependent reduction of the substrate surrogate, hydroxypyruvate. thus, it was concluded that e232 participates in enolate formation by deprotonating the β-carbon of gonydiol. the protonation of the active-site glutamate likely neutralizes its favourable ionic interaction with the sulfonium group, destabilizing that group and resulting in cyclopropanation.taken together, burg is a cyclopropanol synthase that stands as a testament to the ability of evolution to repurpose proteins in central metabolism for entirely new functions in secondary metabolism. burg retains key characteristics from karis, in that it can bind a redox cofactor (nad+) and magnesium ions, but has also evolved new functions, in that it generates a cyclopropanol ring and recycles nad+. like burg, some of the other enzymes in secondary metabolism that generate cyclopropyl groups utilize nucleophilic substitution of a leaving group to generate the cyclopropyl group, but the leaving group is typically a halide or methylthioadenosine (mta), not dms as it is in burg8. for example, the zn2+-dependent enzyme, cmac, catalyses the formation of a thioester-stabilized enolate in the coronatine assembly line, followed by nucleophilic substitution of a chloride leaving group, resulting in cyclopropanation (fig. 1c)9. as another example, the guangnanmycin biosynthetic pathway features a 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (acc) synthase, gnmy, that utilizes a pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (plp) cofactor and an mta leaving group to coax cyclopropanation (fig. 1d)10.the work by hertweck, groll and colleagues provides mechanistic insights into how a pathogenic bacterium assembles the warhead of a critical virulence factor. the data gathered may enable: (1) the development of burg inhibitors as an antivirulence approach to treating melioidosis; (2) the screening of sequence databases for burg-type enzymes as an in silico approach to natural product discovery; and (3) the development of chemoenzymatic strategies for the incorporation of cyclopropanol rings into semisynthetic products. more broadly, this study exemplifies the importance of characterizing virulence pathways as a means of developing novel strategies to target pathogens.davies, j. & davies, d. microbiol. mol. biol. rev. 74, 417–433 (2010).cas article google scholar dickey, s. w., cheung, g. y. c. & otto, m. nat. rev. drug discov. 16, 457–471 (2017).cas article google scholar wiersinga, w. j. et al. nat. rev. dis. primers 4, 17107 (2018).article google scholar klaus, j. r. et al. j. bacteriol. 200, e00008–18 (2018).cas article google scholar trottmann, f. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 58, 14129–14133 (2019).cas article google scholar trottmann, f. et al. nat. chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01005-z (2022).patel, k. m. et al. chemistry 23, 18289–18295 (2017).cas article google scholar ma, s., mandalapu, d., wang, s. & zhang, q. nat. prod. rep. 39, 926–945 (2022).cas article google scholar kelly, w. l. et al. biochemistry 46, 359–368 (2007).cas article google scholar xu, z., pan, g., zhou, h. & shen, b. j. am. chem. soc. 140, 16957–16961 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry, university of florida, gainesville, fl, usaelijah abraham & rebecca a. butcheryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to rebecca a. butcher.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsabraham, e., butcher, r.a. warhead assembly in a lethal pathogen. nat. chem. 14, 848–850 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01013-zdownload citationpublished: 29 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01013-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 