immune checkpoint blocking therapies do not always work and come with some risks, but identifying non-responders and patients at risk of adverse events is becoming easier and more accurate.you have full access to this article via your institution.immunotherapy has revolutionized tumor treatment, tracing back to the application of coley’s toxins two centuries ago. immune checkpoint blockers (icbs), represented by anti-pd-1 antibodies and ctla-4 inhibitors, underscore the rapid development of immunotherapy. the combination of icbs with conventional therapy has now been applied to a variety of malignancies, including triple-negative breast cancer, which generally has the worst prognosis among all breast cancer subtypes. however, how to identify patients who benefit from icbs remains a challenge. aside from icbs, cytokine therapy is one of the oldest immunotherapies against malignancies. since the discovery of the therapeutic effect of interferons (ifns) in leukemia1 in 1984, these cytokines have been used to treat various cancers. the prevailing wisdom is that type i interferon (ifn-i) proteins enhance anti-tumor immune responses by stimulating the maturation of dendritic cells, enhancing t cell cytotoxicity and even eradicating tumor cells by inducing senescence and apoptosis2. in this issue of nature immunology, boukhaled et al.3 show an unexpected relationship between peripheral blood ifn-i reactivity and the efficacy of subsequent icb therapy (fig. 1).the relationship between the therapeutic effect of pd-1 blockade, ifn-stimulated proteins and the ifn response capacity of peripheral blood immune cells. mechanisms that underlie ifn responsiveness were investigated using single-cell assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (scatac-seq) and single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq). ifn-i responsiveness was connected to the physiological state of t cells in patients with cancer; the irc score was used as a biomarker to evaluate the prognosis of patients receiving anti-pd-1 antibody therapy. red dots represent high levels, and blue dots represent low levels. cb, clinical benefit; dar, differentially accessible regions; hnscc, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; irc, ifn-i response capacity; isgs, ifn-i stimulated genes; ncb, no clinical benefit; pbmcs, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; os, overall survival; tf, transcription factor.boukhaled et al.3 developed a mass cytometry (cytof) assay to detect 13 ifn-stimulated proteins (isps; including stimulatory and suppressive ones simultaneously) with single-cell resolution in peripheral blood samples (n = 93) from patients before and after treatment with pembrolizumab or nivolumab (both anti-pd-1 antibodies). to investigate the relationship between the pattern of isp production and the efficacy of anti-pd-1 treatment, the authors analyzed three groups; 31 patient samples from the inspire phase 2 clinical trial were used as a discovery cohort along with baseline samples from 28 patients with cutaneous melanoma and 34 patients with non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc) were used as a validation cohort. the results showed there was no correlation between the isp of total cd45+ cells or each cell cluster before treatment and the overall survival or progression-free survival of patients.as each cell responds differently to ifn-i, the authors hypothesize that the connection between immune cells influences icb responses. to address this possibility, they examined the isp expression of each cell population in the patient samples, and found that patients who benefited from anti-pd-1 antibody therapy had reduced intercellular connections before icb therapy, which were increased after treatment. therefore, this re-coordination to ifn signaling might help to select patients who could benefit from anti-pd-1 treatment. an ifn-i response capacity (irc) score — defined as the mean isp produced before and after ifn stimulation — was then devised to quantify cellular responsiveness. the authors examined the relationship between irc values of individual cell populations and patient prognosis; notably, patients who progressed after treatment had higher pre-therapy irc scores in cd4+ and cd8+ effector t (teff) cells. a validation cohort then showed that lower irc scores in teff cells from peripheral blood before treatment could be used to predict longer progression-free survival and overall survival after anti-pd-1 treatment. the authors then tested whether inhibitory isps were associated with a high irc score as well as treatment efficacy, using samples from the discovery and validation cohorts for modeling, and an additional validation cohort as test data. results show that higher induction of the ido1 enzyme before treatment was associated with longer overall survival.the authors examined the reasons for different ifn responsiveness and why the high-irc group was resistant to anti-pd-1 therapy and had poorer prognosis. as there was no difference in the expression of ifn-stimulated genes (isgs) between the high- and low-irc groups, the cause of differential ifn responsiveness was probably due to epigenetic scarring. the authors found an enrichment of binding motifs related to factors of t cell exhaustion in the high-irc group, including nr4a1 and nr4a2, as well as enriched open chromatin regions in several stat- and irf-binding motifs, which activate isg expression, exhibiting high responsiveness to ifn-i. the low-irc group was enriched in genomic regions associated with dna damage repair and negative regulation of ifn-i, thereby reducing the induction and activation of ifn-i, as dna damage activates the ifn-i response via cgas-sting. cells in the high-irc group had fewer differentially accessible regions, restricted transcriptional potential and activation of the fli1 and runx1 transcriptional networks, which promoted cd8+ t cell depletion and suppressed cd8+ t cell memory. accessible chromatin in high-irc cd8+ teff cells was also enriched in nfatc2 and nfatc3 and the binding motifs of prdm1 and nfil3, both of which could lead to dysfunction of cd8+ t cells. furthermore, the expression of pd-1 pathway-related molecules was upregulated in low-irc scoring cd4+ t cells, which suggests a differential dependence on pd-1 signaling during teff cell-mediated peripheral depletion. the effect of blocking pd-1 is higher in cells that are more active in signaling through pd-1, leading to a stronger response to treatment with anti-pd-1 antibodies. in addition, ifn-i is essential for protecting the reservoir of precursor exhausted t (tpex) cells (a pd-1 target) and studies have shown that limiting ifn signaling maintains the presence of tpex cells and the efficacy of anti-pd-1 antibody therapy. consistent with this idea, high irc scores in cd4+ teff cells correlate with enhanced transcriptional and epigenetic depletion in cd4+ and cd8+ teff cells. moreover, high irc scores are associated with an increase in t follicular helper (tfh) cell programming — a cellular subset that is generally insensitive to anti-pd-1 therapy.why is ifn-i hyper-responsiveness associated with resistance to anti-pd-1 antibody treatment? ifn-i induces the transcription of isgs by jak–stat–irf signaling. isgs have a crucial role in initiating adaptive immunity against infection and tumors. however, ifn-i can also activate nf-κb, which leads to immunosuppression and tumor progression via the induction of pro-tumoral cytokines such as il-10, il-6 and tnf4,5. indeed, the pro-tumoral effects of ifn-i have been reported previously, as has the inhibitory effect on icb therapy6. for example, targeting the long non-coding rna irena can downregulate the expression of pro-tumoral cytokines mediated by nf-κb, while preserving anti-tumoral cytokines such as cxcl9 and cxcl10 that are produced by ifn-i-activated macrophages7. moreover, other confounding factors should not be neglected. for example, immune-related adverse events (iraes) are a common consequence of icb treatment. it is possible that the increased systemic responsiveness to inflammation induced by icb treatment leads to iraes, which subsequently require corticosteroid treatment. corticosteroids, which can effectively inhibit inflammatory responses, are a standard therapy to manage iraes. however, emerging data demonstrate that corticosteroid treatment can impair the therapeutic efficacy of icbs8.although boukhaled et al3. propose the irc score as a new biomarker to evaluate the prognosis of patients receiving anti-pd-1 antibody therapy, other biomarkers have been reported to predict the response to icb, including the tumor mutational burden, levels of pd-l1, mismatch repair deficiency and microsatellite instability9. as such, a pressing need is to improve the sensitivity and specificity of any given single biomarker, as combining two or more biomarkers can enhance the power of prediction10. incorporating several factors to stratify patients in greater detail and analyze individual immunotypes to make diagnoses more accurate is the way forward. for example, the concept of effector immune cell deployment (eicd) can be used to evaluate regional and systemic anti-tumor immunity in patients with cancer, which might also help to evaluate tumor immune evasion and icb responses (reviewed elsewhere11). altogether, we are moving towards a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of tumor immunity, and hopefully will be able to stratify patients better for accurate diagnosis and personalized therapies.quesada, j. r. et al. n. engl. j. med. 310, 15–18 (1984).cas article google scholar zitvogel, l. et al. nat. rev. immunol. 15, 405–414 (2015).cas article google scholar boukhaled, g. m. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01262-7 (2022).article pubmed google scholar zhang, t. et al. medcomm 2, 618–653 (2021).cas article google scholar boukhaled, g. m., harding, s. & brooks, d. g. annu. rev. pathol. 16, 167–198 (2021).cas article google scholar benci, j. l. et al. cell 167, 1540–1554.e12 (2016).cas article google scholar liu, j. et al. nat. can. 2, 457–473 (2021).cas article google scholar bai, x. et al. clin. cancer res. 27, 5993–6000 (2021).cas article google scholar nishino, m. et al. nat. rev. clin. oncol. 14, 655–668 (2017).cas article google scholar litchfield, k. et al. cell 184, 596–614.e14 (2021).cas article google scholar zhang, j. et al. trends immunol. 55, 738–748 (2022). google scholar download referencesguangdong provincial key laboratory of malignant tumor epigenetics and gene regulation, guangdong-hong kong joint laboratory for rna medicine, sun yat-sen memorial hospital, sun yat-sen university, guangzhou, chinashicheng su & erwei songbreast tumor center, sun yat-sen memorial hospital, sun yat-sen university, guangzhou, chinashicheng su & erwei songyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to erwei song.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssu, s., song, e. the systemic effect of type 1 interferon responsiveness on tumor immunotherapy. nat immunol 23, 1141–1143 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01275-2download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01275-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 