a study evaluating serial injections of oncolytic virus therapy shows promising outcomes in patients with glioblastoma, and opens the door to longitudinal study designs with the potential to yield rich molecular insights.you have full access to this article via your institution.the 5-year survival rate for patients diagnosed with glioblastoma (gbm), a highly invasive brain cancer, is less than 10%. upon initial diagnosis, treatment consists of neurosurgical resection followed first by chemoradiation and then by adjuvant temozolomide chemotherapy, which can also be aided by tumor-treating fields (ttf, a localized treatment involving electric fields)1. the presence of a mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase (idh) gene and/or of a hypermethylated promoter for methylguanine methyltransferase (mgmt) portend improved responses to therapy and improved survival, but even these favorable biological features do not forestall the inevitable neoplastic recurrence. tumors without these favorable characteristics inevitably recur within 6–9 months2. at recurrence, gbms can be treated with additional surgery, re-irradiation, different chemotherapy regimens and/or clinical trials. unfortunately, clinical trials of targeted therapies, anti-angiogenic therapies and immunotherapies have not shown improvement in survival compared to controls1.in this issue of nature medicine, todo et al.3 report a pivotal phase 2 clinical trial in which the oncolytic herpes simplex virus g47∆ (delytact, daichii sankyo) was stereotactically injected into 19 patients with recurrent gbm (rgbm). they report that 84% of patients were alive at the 1-year landmark (the expected 1-year survival rate was just 15% based on a prespecified control primary endpoint in the clinical trial protocol), and median duration of overall survival (mos) from the first g47∆ injection was 20.2 months, representing a significant advance in rgbm treatment. this finding justified the conditional approval of g47∆ by the japanese regulatory organization (pharmaceuticals and medical devices agency).despite the positive outcome of this trial, skepticism always exists in neuro-oncology based on the innumerable failures of other seemingly promising therapies that then do not show a benefit in large, well-controlled, late-phase randomized trials. in this context, it is important to note some limitations of the study by todo et al.3. in addition to the small sample size, there was considerable biologic heterogeneity. for example, 6 out of 19 patients had a mutated idh gene (although, surprisingly, this did not alter survival) and mgmt promoter methylation data were not uniformly available. although use of a control group would have been unethical in this study, an alternative approach such as a matched cluster randomized control group4 could have strengthened the conclusions. there is also the possibility that there was selection bias based on tumor size and location, as well as accrual of patients considered well enough to undergo up to 6 procedures over 5 months. but despite these caveats, the authors report that 3 out of 19 patients are still alive more than 3 years after treatment, suggesting that a clinical benefit may indeed exist.it is important to note that every previous trial of oncolytic herpes simplex virus or other oncolytic viruses administered the treatment via a single stereotactic injection5, whereas in this study g47∆ was injected up to 6 times over a period of 5 months, and these injections were also coupled with tumor biopsies (fig. 1). this is unprecedented in gbm intratumoral therapy due to concerns over the perceived cumulative risk of repeated surgical procedures in patients thought to be constitutionally frail, but also due to the substantial expense of serial neurosurgical biopsies. yet, both in this report and a companion paper published in nature communications (which reports on the phase 1 study of g47∆)6, the authors show that repeated dosing and biopsies are fairly well-tolerated. outside of the immediate findings reported here, this type of trial design is pivotal to overcoming a major limitation in human gbm science; namely, the lack of serial interrogation of the tumor to determine if the therapeutic intervention is having the expected effect at a molecular level. in fact, a consortium in the usa is in the process of starting a longitudinal biopsy study in gbm, funded by philanthropy, to address this issue7.g47δ was injected into patients up to 6 times within 5 months; increases in t cell infiltration were observed with each treatment. most patients survived more than 1 year and still had stable disease at 2 years.the value of longitudinal biopsies is illustrated by the mechanistic insights obtained in the studies from todo et al.3,6 on the basis of preclinical studies, it is proposed that oncolytic viruses exert their antitumor effects by means of selective infection, replication and bio-distribution in tumors into which they are injected. this causes cytotoxicity and immunogenic cell death, leading to increased host innate inflammatory responses, which gives rise to a tumor microenvironment that favors adaptive t cell-mediated antitumor immune responses8. the latter is evident in serial tumor biopsies analysed by todo et al.3,6, which show an increase in infiltrating cd4+ and cd8+ t cells with reduced foxp3+ cells that was qualitatively dependent on the repeated dosing schedule. however, the authors did not see evidence of g47∆ persistence in tumors despite repeated injections, nor were they able to study g47∆-induced alterations in the cellular and molecular tumor microenvironment. also, it remains unclear to what degree innate inflammatory responses9,10 and/or t cell adaptive responses against the likely immunodominant viral antigens versus the less immunodominant tumor neo-antigens contribute to efficacy11. the emergence of sophisticated technologies that can be applied to even small tumor samples — such as single-cell rna sequencing, codex (a technique for multiplexed antibody-based tissue imaging), spatial transcriptomics, t cell receptor dna sequencing, and others — will undoubtedly improve the science in gbm clinical trials in the near future, particularly if longitudinal biopsies are adopted in the early phases of clinical development for a new intervention.finally, gbm clinical trials depend on magnetic resonance imaging (mri) visualization of tumors to judge effectiveness, based on leakage of the contrast agent, gadolinium, through the partial breakdown of the tight junctions (known as the blood–brain barrier) in the vessels that feed these tumors. however, other insults (such as radiation or inflammation) can also result in breakdown of the blood–brain barrier, leading to the observation of pseudoprogression12. todo et al.3,6 note that this was evident with g47∆, which was expected to cause inflammation and increased leakage of the contrast agent. in fact, the median progression-free survival (mpfs) in treated patients was only 4.7 months. compared to the mos of 20.2 months, this relatively low mpfs suggests a high rate of inflammatory pseudoprogression. therefore, for inflammatory immunotherapies such as those based on oncolytic viruses, gadolinium-enhanced mri may be a less-than-optimal method for detecting real progression and additional or complementary modalities to assess clinical benefit are called for.the studies from todo et al. provide important efficacy and safety data on g47δ, but their value goes beyond this. their observation that rgbm becomes infiltrated with an increasing number of effector t cells upon serial treatment provides a strategy for transforming the immunologically ‘cold’ gbm microenvironment into one that is ‘hot’ and hopefully more recognizable for elimination by the immune system.bagley, s. j. et al. clin. cancer res. 28, 594–602 (2022).article google scholar milano, m. t. et al. int. j. radiat. oncol. biol. phys. 78, 1147–1155 (2010).cas article google scholar todo, t. et al. nat. med. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01897-x (2022).article pubmed google scholar wheeler, l. a. et al. neuro-oncology 18, 1137–1145 (2016).cas article google scholar chiocca, e. a., nassiri, f., wang, j., peruzzi, p. & zadeh, g. neuro-oncology 21, 14–25 (2019).cas article google scholar todo, t., ino, y., ohtsu, h., shibahara, j. & tanaka, m. nat. commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31262-y (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar goonan, j. breakthrough cancer announces $50m in grants to empower researchers from five top cancer research centers to work as one. prnewswire https://go.nature.com/3xue4fi (2022).chiocca, e. a. & rabkin, s. d. cancer immunol. res. 2, 295–300 (2014).cas article google scholar alvarez-breckenridge, c. a. et al. nat. med. 18, 1827–1834 (2012).cas article google scholar otani, y. et al. clin. cancer res. 28, 1460–1473 (2022).cas article google scholar alayo, q. a. et al. sci. rep. 10, 5095 (2020).cas article google scholar johnson, d. r., glenn, c. a., javan, r. & olson, j. j. j. neurooncol. 158, 139–165 (2021).article google scholar download referencesharvey cushing neuro-oncology laboratories, department of neurosurgery, brigham and women’s hospital, harvard medical school, boston, ma, usajohn d. christie & e. antonio chioccayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to e. antonio chiocca.e.a.c. is currently (within the last year) an advisor to amacathera, bionaut labs, candel therapeutics, genenta, insightec, dnatrix, seneca therapeutics and synthetic biologics. he has equity options in bionaut laboratories, dnatrix, immunomic therapeutics, seneca therapeutics, synthetic biologics, and ternalys therapeutics,he is co-founder and on the board of directors of ternalys therapeutics.reprints and permissionschristie, j.d., chiocca, e.a. treat and repeat: oncolytic virus therapy for brain cancer. nat med 28, 1540–1542 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01901-4download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01901-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 