mutant-selective kras-targeting drugs hold great promise for the treatment of some of the most aggressive forms of cancer. building on the breakthrough success of kras-g12c inhibitors, researchers have now found a way to target another mutant kras with serine-modifying covalent inhibitors.you have full access to this article via your institution.get in the hole! — arguably the four most annoying words heard on a golf course. yet as chemists, we cannot help but reflect on times when we have found ourselves muttering similar words in our attempts to discover and design small molecules that bind to cryptic pockets on historically undruggable proteins. from the first discovery of kras as a major oncogenic driver in many forms of cancer, drug hunters have set their sights on this protein. after decades of thwarted attempts, the first success has only just been realized with the approval of sotorasib (lumakras), a compound that specifically targets one mutant form of kras, g12c. key to the activity and selectivity of sotorasib and other kras-g12c inhibitors is their covalent mechanism, which involves the formation of a permanent bond with the oncogenic c12 residue. although this marks a breakthrough for the field, many kras-driven cancers with alternative mutations remain untreatable. in this issue of nature chemical biology, zhang et al. report the first small molecules that target another mutant form of kras, g12s, through covalent modification of its oncogenic s12 residue1, underscoring the broader potential for electrophilic chemistry to serve as a trump card for ‘getting’ compounds into holes on proteins.the physiological function of kras is to act as a molecular switch, cycling between ‘on’ and ‘off’ states to orchestrate signals that tell the cell when to grow and divide2 (fig. 1a). certain mutations in kras lock the protein in the ‘on’ position, leading to unmitigated cell growth and the emergence of cancer. drugs that bind to mutant kras and force it into an ‘off’ state have long been sought after, but have proven exceptionally challenging to develop because of kras’s relatively featureless surface, which leaves few pockets or holes for drugs to bind. the first glimmer of hope came with the realization that one of the mutations, g12c, that converts an inert glycine residue into a nucleophilic cysteine offered a way for covalent drugs to access a cryptic pocket on kras through leveraging a combination of binding and reactivity3. given the success of this approach, chemists are now actively trying to apply a similar strategy to other oncogenic kras mutants, all of which present an even greater challenge due to the uniquely nucleophilic character of cysteine.a, in healthy cells, wild-type (wt) kras toggles between ‘on’ and ‘off’ states in response to extracellular growth signals, thereby controlling cell growth and division (left). when mutated, kras can get locked in the ‘on’ state and promote excessive proliferation, leading to tumorigenesis (right). codon 12 is particularly prone to mutation, and such mutations drive some of the most prevalent and aggressive cancers. b, two molecularly similar oncogenic mutations at codon 12 introduce either a cysteine (g12c) or serine (g12s) in the place of glycine. cysteine, being far more nucleophilic than serine, has served as a useful anchor point for electrophilic drugs, such as sotorasib, that bind to a pocket or hole in kras and react with the mutant cysteine residue to block kras-g12c signaling. c, researchers have now designed β-lactone-containing molecules, such as g12si-1 (1), to covalently bind to the much less reactive serine mutant and block kras-g12s activity.in this article, zhang et al. take a resourceful approach to target the so-far-undrugged kras-g12s mutant, which features an oncogenic serine residue (ser12) instead of the cysteine of kras-g12c1. cysteine and serine differ by only a single atom (fig. 1b), but this small difference has profound consequences for the respective capacities of the two mutants to react with electrophilic compounds — cysteine being highly reactive and serine comparatively sedate. there are some notable exceptions to this. catalytic serines of the serine hydrolase enzyme superfamily exist in a local environment that dramatically enhances their reactivity over that of non-catalytic serines found elsewhere4. though compounds that target catalytic serines represent a large and important class of molecules and drugs5, we are unaware of any covalent ligands that are capable of reacting selectively with a non-catalytic serine residue.against this backdrop, the authors forged into uncharted territory, seeing an opportunity to build off a decade of work targeting kras-g12c. the crux of the problem was finding a reactive group that would form a covalent bond with ser12 and not react broadly across the proteome. from among the many possibilities, the authors selected the β-lactone moiety, a compact, strained heterocycle found in numerous natural products and known to react with catalytic serines6. they introduced this group in place of the cysteine-reactive acrylamide on an advanced kras-g12c inhibitor, adagrasib (mrtx849)7. this design was meant to ensure that the new serine-directed electrophile would lie within striking distance of ser12. gratifyingly, when the new hybrid molecule, g12si-1 (1), was introduced to kras-g12s, it worked as planned, acylating ser12 within an hour (fig. 1c). an x-ray structure of the molecule bound to kras-g12s confirmed the connectivity of g12si-1 to kras through an ester bond. interestingly, the authors also observed key hydrogen bonds to the opened lactone ring, indicating that this acylation event not only may have been driven by the proximity of the serine and β-lactone, but also could have been potentiated through stabilizing reaction intermediates in a fashion reminiscent of how catalytic serines become acylated with their substrates4.optimization of the inhibitor enabled further testing in cancer cells to better understand the functional consequences of liganding kras-g12s at ser12. as one would hope, the best compound, g12si-5 (5), reduced ras-gtp levels, blocked downstream effector signaling and ultimately impaired cell growth in cancer cell lines, demonstrating that this approach was an effective strategy to suppress the oncogenic drive of kras-g12s. importantly, these effects were selective for cells harboring g12s mutations.the compounds reported in this study are likely not suitable as drugs, and the road from early tool compounds such as these to clinical agents is long and arduous, with no guarantees of success. but, as some will remember, similar doubts were also voiced when the first kras-g12c inhibitors were reported and yet, less than a decade later, we have already seen the first approval of a kras-g12c-targeting drug8, and many more are in development.expanding these concepts to other kras mutants with weakly reactive residues, such as g12d, will be an important avenue for future work that could benefit many additional patients afflicted with kras-driven cancers. indeed, covalent and non-covalent kras-g12d inhibitors are already in active development9. beyond kras, this study highlights the exciting possibility of developing covalent ligands for other non-catalytic serine residues across the proteome. although it is premature to predict how many non-catalytic serines may prove tractable to covalent chemistry, we have confidence that this current study will serve as both a valuable roadmap and a source of inspiration for chemists interested in continuing to push the frontiers of protein druggability.zhang, z., guiley, k. z. & shokat, k. m. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01065-9 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar moore, a. r. et al. nat. rev. drug discov. 19, 533–552 (2020).cas article google scholar ostrem, j. m. et al. nature 503, 548–551 (2013).cas article google scholar dodson, g. & wlodawer, a. trends biochem. sci. 23, 347–352 (1998).cas article google scholar bachovchin, d. a. & cravatt, b. f. nat. rev. drug. discov. 11, 52–68 (2012).cas article google scholar robinson, s. l. et al. nat. prod. rep. 36, 458–475 (2019).cas article google scholar fell, j. b. et al. j. med. chem. 63, 6679–6693 (2020).cas article google scholar skoulidis, f. et al. n. engl. j. med. 384, 2371–2381 (2021).cas article google scholar wang, x. et al. j. med. chem. 65, 3123–3133 (2022).cas article google scholar download referenceslundbeck la jolla research center, san diego, ca, usamicah j. niphakisdepartment of chemistry, the scripps research insitute, la jolla, ca, usabenjamin f. cravattyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to micah j. niphakis or benjamin f. cravatt.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsj. niphakis, m., f. cravatt, b. ace-ylation in the hole. nat chem biol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01083-7download citationpublished: 21 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01083-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 