hello nature readers, would you like to get this briefing in your inbox free every day? sign up herethe motors are built from dna strands arranged into triangular platforms attached to a long, rotating arm.credit: a.-k. pumm et al./nature (cc by 4.0)physicists have built a molecular-scale motor entirely from dna strands, and used it to store energy by winding up a dna ‘spring’. it is not the first dna nanomotor, but it’s certainly the first one to actually perform measurable mechanical work, says biophysicist and co-author hendrik dietz. the tiny machine gains energy from brownian motion — the constant random argy-bargy of molecules in a medium. the machine turns like the ratchet wheel in a clock, winding a string of dna like a spiral spring.nature | 4 min readsee more: a 3-minute video introduces dna origami — the art of folding dna to create tiny nanoscale machines that could work inside the human body. (nature, from 2016)reference: nature paperemissions data for different locations could help researchers to reduce the environmental cost of artificial intelligence (ai) experiments. for example, a machine-learning model trained in the central united states or germany emitted more than twice as much carbon dioxide as the same model trained in norway, which gets most of its electricity from hydroelectric power, or france, which relies mostly on nuclear power.nature | 5 min readreference: arxiv preprint (not peer reviewed)source: ref. 1a quiet epidemic has been spreading among women and girls across afghanistan since at least 2004, and case numbers have risen further since the taliban took power in august 2021. local media reports, government officials and the women themselves blame these events — which sometimes strike many people at once — to poisonings, often by taliban or other militant groups. doctors have diagnosed the illness as conversion disorder, in which physical symptoms mimic a neurological disorder and often follow a period of serious emotional or physical distress. in 2021, the women's psychiatric ward of herat regional hospital recorded 12,678 cases of the mysterious ailment, often resulting in loss of consciousness and paralysis. clinical studies of the condition are extremely rare.undark | 14 min readzion levi’s melanoma went into remission thanks to a powerful immunotherapy drug called nivolumab. then he donated his faeces — and the microbes inside — to help others who had failed to respond to the treatment or whose cancers had become resistant to it. it was a small trial — it involved only 26 people — but one in three of them benefited from the faecal microbial transfer (fmt). today, at least 30 fmt trials are under way around the world. they hint at a new era of ‘ecological oncology’ and aim to uncover how the gut microbiome influences the progression of distant tumours, the effectiveness of treatments and the organisms that live in tumours themselves.nature | 13 min readreference: science paper 1 & science paper 2when jessica eise asked coffee farmers in colombia what they wanted from climate science, they requested practical and actionable information: how to fend off increasing pests and diseases, for example, or better predict optimum harvest time. eise and her team went to the literature, but found little in the way of straightforward tips for adapting to a shifting climate. the experience made her think: if all the research is not helping those who need it most, what is the point? eise urges fellow scholars to become more engaged with real-world needs and suggests six ways to help make it happen.nature | 6 min readengineer greg robinson is a long-serving nasa manager who many credit for saving the deeply troubled james webb space telescope. nasa leaders had to twist both of my arms to convince him to take on the project, jokes robinson. but webb needed his mastery of technical detail and bureaucratic nuance. it was years late and billions over budget. it is fiendishly complicated, has almost no margin for error and has hundreds of single points of failure. now, thanks to robinson — and the rest of the brilliant webb team — the telescope is shaping up to be one of the space agency’s greatest triumphs.the wall street journal | 8 min read & the new york times | 7 min readsee more: robinson joined the fun on the talk show the daily show with trevor noah on tuesday (youtube | 10 min video)ecologist terry mcglynn offers a helpful peek behind the curtain of peer review at a society journal. (small pond science blog | 11 min read)