the rational synthesis of advanced porous materials that mimic the behaviours of biological proteins remains challenging. now, a distinct type of crystalline porous peptide framework has been prepared through bioinspired noncovalent assembly, enabling chemical tuning of the properties and functions of the pore environments.you have full access to this article via your institution.over the past three decades, crystalline porous materials, such as metal–organic frameworks (mofs) and covalent organic frameworks, have emerged as an exciting research frontier of chemistry and materials science1,2. the resulting intrinsic porosity and high surface area are of interest for a range of applications, including gas adsorption and separation, sensing and catalysis. these structures often have a high prevalence of rigid aromatic components and generally form well-crystallized products with few geometric degrees of freedom. but such structures tend to have rigid internal cavities that may be disadvantageous, as recent findings have shown that adaptable (flexible) pore environments have superior guest-to-framework interactions3. furthermore, materials with high concentration of rigid aromatic motifs also show substantial hydrophobicity, which greatly affects the surface compatibility for materials chemistry and biocompatibility for biologic systems, severely impeding practical applications.inspired by nature, the use of peptide-derived linkers to construct porous materials would be a promising strategy for addressing the above-mentioned key challenges, as such biologically-active linkers are quite flexible4. furthermore, the side-chain groups and the sequences of amino acids can be readily modified to introduce different functionality5. these structural variations could render the self-assembled peptide frameworks with excellent adaptability, hydrophilicity, compatibility and processability. for example, metal–peptide frameworks6, formed through the bioinspired assembly of peptides and metals to give structures with nanometre-sized cavities or pores, are often conformationally flexible with adaptive host−guest recognition. however, the design and synthesis of peptide-mofs are generally restricted to short peptides (for example, dipeptides and tripeptides)3, and the limitations of the resulting pore environments hinder their further development.now, writing in the journal of the american chemical society, andy nguyen and colleagues have developed a new class of highly crystalline peptide frameworks with permanent porosity through a noncovalent, metal-free assembly of longer, synthetic peptides (made of nine amino acids)7. unusually, the resultant pore environments can be precisely tuned with a series of functional groups, reminiscent of natural enzymatic pockets. the rationally designed peptide monomer, namely uic-1 (fig. 1a), contains 2-aminoisobutyric acid (a noncanonical amino acid), which significantly improves conformational rigidity and increases the tendency to form an α-helical secondary structure. the peptide system can balance polar and apolar interactions, greatly promoting supramolecular self-assembly. for instance, the deployment of l-gln could introduce interchain hydrogen bonding. in addition, hydrophobic side-chain groups derived from l-leu and 2-aminoisobutyric acid could favour coiled coil formation. note that the rigid, planar bipyridyl moieties cap the helix at both terminals, facilitating the growth of a peptide lattice by π−π stacking. the researchers confirmed the helical conformation of uic-1 by circular dichroism and two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.a, chemical structure of peptide monomer uic-1. amino acid residues (a4, b5 and b7), with side chains that point into the pore and can be changed to introduce different functionalities while preserving the general structure of the framework, are highlighted. b, x-ray crystal structure of the peptide framework of uic-1. c, a mixture of α-helix and 310-helix conformations of the peptide helical building block within the framework. d, the alternating, interdigitated π−π stacking of bipyridyl units. e–g, x-ray crystal structure of uic-1 variants achieved by chemical tuning of side-chain groups at different positions: ser residue in a4 position (e); his residue in b5 position (f); met residue in b7 position (g). h, x-ray crystal structure of tert-butylbenzene@uic-1. i, x-ray crystal structure showing the arrangement of ag(i) ions within uic-1-b7m. reproduced from ref. 7, american chemical society.the team triggered the self-assembly of uic-1 by slowly cooling a refluxing saturated solution in 1:9 h2o/mecn. the resulting peptide assemblies crystallized in the p21 space group, as clearly evidenced by single crystal x-ray diffraction (fig. 1b). as expected, the structure of uic-1 displays a mixture of α-helix and 310-helix stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonds (fig. 1c). such a conformation allows the alternating, interdigitated π−π stacking (average interplanar distance of 3.4 å) of the bipyridyl unit to generate a metal-free peptide framework with rectangular-shaped nanochannels of approximately 1.5 × 1.1 nm (fig. 1b,d). notably, the polar gln residue plays a crucial role in stabilizing the entire framework, as it engages three different interchain and one intrachain hydrogen-bonding interactions. the pore environment, which critically influences the properties of uic-1’s framework, is defined by the internal residues that can be engineered through the chemical tuning of side-chain groups at different positions. for example, x-ray crystal structures revealed that replacing an apolar ala residue with a polar hydroxy group (ser residue) can preserve the structure (fig. 1e), crystallizing in a nearly identical unit cell while profoundly enhancing the structural stability. similar side-chain variations can introduce other functionally rich groups in the pores with the same framework topology, including n-donor (his residue, fig. 1f), thioether (met residue, fig. 1g), carboxylic acid (asp residue), and aromatic (4-iodo-phe) groups. such variation could integrate more reactive acidic and basic functionalities that can be tolerated in the pore, which is challenging to realize in metal−peptide frameworks.the highly ordered nanopores of uic-1’s framework with protein-mimicking environments inspired the researchers to investigate its host−guest chemistry. they selected tert-butylbenzene as a guest molecule to be accommodated in the main channels (fig. 1h). interestingly, the binding of tert-butylbenzene led to conformational changes in the peptide framework, indicating adaptive guest-binding ability. in contrast, the binding of iodobenzene (a guest molecule smaller than tert-butylbenzene) is less favourable, implying that the peptide framework adopts an induced-fit binding mechanism similar to the binding behaviour of natural enzymes. notably, metal ions can also bind to the framework via coordination bonds. for example, ag(i) ions were coordinated by bipyridyl units in thioether-functionalized uic-1 (also termed as uic-1-b7m) and are disordered over a major and minor site (fig. 1i). the post-synthetic metalation might create great opportunities to expand the functional space of this material, with potential to mimic artificial metalloenzymes.this study may significantly advance the development of crystalline porous materials with multivariable proteomimetic behaviour. the researchers illustrated an artful strategy for peptide design, emphasizing how to control the secondary structures and balance hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions so that the pore environments can be engineered. the metal-free assembly allows the introduction of useful functional groups containing carboxylic acids and n- and s-donors, overcoming the limitations of metal–peptide frameworks. there are many potential applications of these materials. for example, the presented peptide frameworks with larger channel sizes may facilitate the mass transportation of the substrates and products of reactions with high catalytic rates. the demonstration of host−guest binding properties offers ample opportunities for applications in biology and medicine. with the aid of machine learning and the materials genome initiative8, we anticipate that a wider range of artificial peptide frameworks with exciting properties could be accessible.on the other hand, a conspicuously missing property of these materials is their chirality. further studies are needed to better understand the details of the transmission of chirality from a molecular level to a macroscopic scale. exploring the chirality expression of porous peptide frameworks — such as chiral recognition, enantioselective separation and asymmetric catalysis — would be a more ambitious target, as their synthetic cavities or pores could be tailored to potentially mimic the highly selective biomolecule bindings of natural enzymes (such as escherichia coli proteins)9. on the application level, these novel porous materials would be exceptionally useful for preparing ultrathin chiral membranes for enantioseparation, to address the grand challenge of the trade-off between permeability and enantioselectivity. there is much to be discovered beyond the laboratory regarding developing porous peptide frameworks for real-world applications and the combination of peptide chemistry and porous materials.cai, g., yan, p., zhang, l., zhou, h. c. & jiang, h. l. chem. rev. 121, 12278–12326 (2021).cas article google scholar geng, k. et al. chem. rev. 120, 8814–8933 (2020).cas article google scholar dong, j., liu, y. & cui, y. j. am. chem. soc. 143, 17316–17336 (2021).cas article google scholar rabone, j. et al. science 329, 1053–1057 (2010).cas article google scholar martí-gastaldo, c. et al. nat. chem. 6, 343–351 (2014).article google scholar katsoulidis, a. p. et al. nature 565, 213–217 (2019).cas article google scholar heinz-kunert, s. l. et al. j. am. chem. soc. 144, 7001–7009 (2022).cas article google scholar nosengo, n. nature 533, 22–25 (2016).cas article google scholar vyas, n. k., vyas, m. n. & quiocho, f. a. science 242, 1290–1295 (1988).cas article google scholar download referencestwitter: @zhaogroupnusdepartment of chemical & biomolecular engineering, national university of singapore, queenstown, singaporejinqiao dong & dan zhaoschool of chemistry and chemical engineering, state key laboratory of metal matrix composites, shanghai jiao tong university, shanghai, chinajinqiao dongyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jinqiao dong or dan zhao.reprints and permissionsdong, j., zhao, d. porous and permutable peptide frameworks. nat. chem. 14, 852–854 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01011-1download citationpublished: 28 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-01011-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 