how global warming affects the ability of northern peatlands to store carbon is uncertain. now, researchers show that early summer warming increases carbon uptake, whereas warmer late summer decreases it.you have full access to this article via your institution.northern peatlands have a cooling impact on the climate by removing co2 from the atmosphere and accumulating carbon as peat, poorly decomposed organic matter. in peatlands, carbon inputs by vegetation exceed carbon losses because decomposition is slow in water-logged soils (fig. 1). the estimates of this carbon storage vary, but it amounts to a large part of global terrestrial carbon, and changes in it will have impacts on the atmosphere and climate1,2. how warming affects peat accumulation or ancient peat is highly uncertain. writing in nature climate change, manuel helbig and colleagues3 report how warming occurring in early summer can increase carbon uptake, whereas warming in late summer can decrease it in northern high-latitude peatlands. their analysis suggests that plant phenology and water level control the seasonal temperature responses of co2 exchange between peatlands and the atmosphere.helbig and colleagues report that warmer early growing seasons have the potential to increase peatland carbon uptake through the positive growth response of plants. later in summer, warming tends to lead to lower water levels and decreased carbon uptake.peat accumulation is a result of several processes — carbon uptake by photosynthesis, and carbon losses through decomposition, leaching and in fires. there is a multitude of enzymatic reactions involved whose rates are temperature dependent. warming can increase both uptake of carbon by plants and carbon release back to the atmosphere through decomposition. a small difference between the carbon input and output matters. in addition, the effect of warming may appear through water-level changes, because the prevailing wet conditions are the fundamental feature of peatlands and sustaining carbon accumulation. recent model simulations that combined water-level drawdown experiments with future climate scenarios found that losses of carbon from peatlands increased with water-level drawdown4,5. changes in precipitation and evapotranspiration, and their effects on peatland wetness, may vary regionally and are uncertain. along with growing awareness of the ongoing climate change and large carbon storage in peat, data on net co2 exchange (difference between the photosynthetic gain of co2 and respiratory loss of co2) between peatlands and the atmosphere have been collected from pristine sites (fig. 1) and from experimental manipulations mimicking the warming impacts6,7,8. now, data series that span up to 20 years are available, which have been utilized by helbig and colleagues3.the continuous measurements of net co2 exchange capture the diurnal, seasonal and year-to-year variations and their responses to changes in plant growth, temperature and wetness. current weather variations provide glimpses into possible future conditions. for example, the timing of snowmelt determined the annual carbon gain, which was larger the earlier the snowmelt occurred, suggesting that earlier starts of growing seasons have the potential to increase carbon accumulation in northern peatlands8. moreover, long-lasting drought events with lower water levels decreased annual carbon accumulation across peatlands in northern europe9. such drought events are expected to become more frequent, threatening carbon accumulation in peatlands.the study by helbig and colleagues used continuous multi-year data from 20 northern high-latitude peatlands. the study consisted of 195 years of observations, where variations in annual mean air temperatures were within ±3 °c of the overall annual mean air temperature of each peatland site. the authors showed that the temperature responses of co2 exchange should be analysed by distinguishing different seasons, in addition to annual values. the approach was backed up by earlier, more extensive observations of ecosystem responses to heterogeneous warming or cooling trends in high northern latitudes10,11. the authors show that in early summer (approximately may–june), warming resulted in larger carbon uptake, whereas in late summer (approximately july–august), warming resulted in decreased carbon uptake; these temperature responses of carbon uptake were associated with greater-than-average vegetation productivity and lower-than-average water-level positions, respectively.the authors suggest that warmer early growing seasons have the potential to increase peatland carbon uptake through the earlier start of photosynthesis and the positive growth response of plants. later in summer, warming tends to lead to lower water levels, and there is more decomposition than photosynthesis, resulting in decreased carbon uptake. the spruce and peatland responses under changing environments (spruce) experiment, a multi-year experiment with instrumental warming of peat and air, with treatments from 2.25 °c to 9 °c above ambient air temperature in large open-top chambers7, showed that warming led to increasing loss of carbon and a vegetation shift. even though those experimental temperature increases were substantial, warming is considered, in the long term, to lead to vegetation changes where vascular plants, mainly shrubs, benefit at the cost of peat mosses, which are essential peat builders.helbig and colleagues propose that there may be regions where, on average, carbon uptake has been decreased due to warmer late summers and autumns, and regions with warmer springs with potentially increased carbon uptake. there are, however, large uncertainties in how northern high-latitude peatlands have and will respond. possible directional changes in water levels and vegetation can lead to a regime shift and new trajectories. as helbig and collegues suggest, monitoring regional atmospheric co2 concentrations can indicate changes in the seasonal peatland carbon uptake. in all, the long-term in situ data are extremely valuable when monitoring the responses of peatlands. still, the observation network is sparse relative to the enormous area of the northern peatlands and the spatial differences in warming and precipitation trends. we need these long-term measurements, besides experiments, for monitoring, protecting and conserving the peatland carbon sink.amesbury, m. j., gallego-sala, a. & loisel, j. nat. geosci. 12, 880–883 (2019).cas article google scholar friedlingstein, p. et al. earth syst. sci. data 14, 1917–2005 (2022).article google scholar helbig, m. et al. nat. clim. change https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01428-z (2022).article google scholar morris, p. j. nat. clim. change 11, 560–562 (2021).article google scholar huang, y. et al. nat. clim. change 11, 618–622 (2021).cas article google scholar laine, a. m. et al. glob. change biol. 25, 1995–2008 (2019).article google scholar hanson, p. j. et al. agu adv. 1, e2020av000163 (2020).article google scholar aurela, m., laurila, t. & tuovinen, j.-p. geophys. res. lett. 31, l16119 (2004).article google scholar rinne, j. et al. phil. trans. r. soc. b 375, 20190517 (2020).cas article google scholar xia, j. et al. nat. geosci. 7, 173–180 (2014).cas article google scholar tang, r. et al. nat. clim. change 12, 380–385 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesfinnish meteorological institute, helsinki, finlandsari juutinendepartment of geographical and historical studies, university of eastern finland, joensuu, finlandsari juutinenyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to sari juutinen.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjuutinen, s. summer matters for peatlands. nat. clim. chang. 12, 706–707 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01438-xdownload citationpublished: 28 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01438-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 