cells can sense the mechanical properties of their environment. by adjusting the ruffling of their membranes, cells respond to different viscosities of their surrounding liquid medium.you have full access to this article via your institution.cells can sense physical variables from their environment, with major implications in the function of both healthy and diseased tissues. mechanosensing — the sensing of mechanical variables — has been largely studied in the context of the cell microenvironment, composed of neighbouring cells and extracellular matrix (ecm) proteins. consequently, several mechanisms have been described that explain how cells sense the elasticity1 or viscoelasticity2 of the ecm. however, how and if cells sense the mechanical (viscous) properties of the liquid media in which they are immersed has been far less studied. this is a highly relevant question: whereas cells are typically studied in aqueous media with a viscosity like that of water, physiological media such as blood3, mucus4 or saliva4 have much higher viscosity. writing in nature physics, matthew pittman and colleagues5 report that they have now identified a mechanism for viscosity sensing that is mediated by membrane ruffles.a handful of studies have analysed the influence of the viscosity of media surrounding a cell in different contexts. for cells moving through mucus, for example6, increased viscosity has the intuitive effect of impairing cell migration. in contrast, for cells strongly attached to a flat substrate, increased medium viscosity has the opposite effect of increasing cell migration7.this may initially appear counter-intuitive, but that is not necessarily the case: cells can be considered as non-inertial systems, in which movement is fuelled by protrusive forces largely driven by actin polymerization (of the order of nanonewtons8). for cells to migrate or spread on their ecm substrate, protrusive forces must be balanced by adhesive friction between cells and their substrate. in this context, drag forces exerted by medium viscosity are typically of the order of piconewtons9, and thus do not directly impede movement. thus, in such a system, medium viscosity cannot be interpreted as a drag on movement, and its biophysical effects become much more interesting.pittman and colleagues5 addressed this question by identifying a mechanism by which medium viscosity affects cell motility, adhesion and cytoskeletal dynamics for cells seeded on flat substrates. by seeding different types of adhesive cells on flat stiff substrates, the team showed that increasing the viscosity of the medium leads to a wide range of effects. cells migrated faster than previously described7, but also modified their interaction with their underlying ecm substrate in different ways.cell–substrate force transmission and contact area — cell spreading — increased, and there was a higher formation and turnover of integrin-mediated adhesion complexes, the adhesive structures that mediate cell–substrate attachment and force transmission. interestingly, all these effects were accompanied by the suppression of membrane ruffles — the upward protruding actin- and membrane-containing folds that typically appear during the mesenchymal mode of cell spreading and migration.to understand the potential role of membrane ruffles, we must first understand how they form. on flat stiff substrates, highly adhesive cells often form flat actin-rich structures called lamellipodia, which mediate cell migration and spreading via actin polymerization (fig. 1). however, this protrusive action of lamellipodia is opposed both by myosin contractility and membrane or cortical tension. the former moves actin away from the spreading edge in what is known as retrograde flow, whereas the latter resists the membrane extension that accompanies spreading. these two opposing factors often force lamellipodia to buckle upwards instead of spreading, thereby forming membrane ruffles10.left: under low-viscosity conditions, actin polymerization against the cell edge (lamellipodium) is countered by cortical tension, leading to ruffle formation. right: under high-viscosity conditions, ruffle formation is impaired by viscous drag. increased cell–substrate contact leads to the formation of cell–substrate adhesions, which counter actin retrograde flows and promote lamellipodial protrusion and cell spreading. increased membrane and cortex availability also reduces cortical tension, further promoting spreading.however, how could such ruffles mediate cell responses to viscosity? as pittman and colleagues have shown, they can do it by purely mechanical means. through simple mechanical modelling, they found that in high-viscosity media, viscous drag drastically increases, leading to forces comparable to those required to buckle lamellipodia. thus, viscous drag is nowhere near sufficient to impair cell migration or spreading by itself, but its magnitude is relevant to impairing ruffle formation, which probably involves weaker forces.medium viscosity thus impairs ruffle formation, with a cascade of downstream effects. flat lamellipodia have a higher contact area with the substrate than buckled ones, leading to increased adhesion formation. this higher adhesion means that myosin contractility is transmitted to the substrate, instead of generating actin retrograde flows that would slow down lamellipodial (and cell) spreading. in parallel, reduced ruffle formation means that the cell membrane stores are more available to be used for spreading, reducing cortical tension. overall, these effects promote cell spreading, and eventually cell migration once cells become polarized and lamellipodia protrude in one specific direction.in summary, pittman and colleagues have provided an elegant example of a mechanosensing mechanism that doesn’t take place at the molecular scale as usually described but via the buckling of micrometre-sized structures. the effects seem to be mediated mainly by changes in adhesion rather than membrane availability, as alternative means of manipulating such availability, such as endocytosis or osmotic shocks, do not reproduce the effects. this suggests that the in-plane tension that matters is that of the actin cortex rather than the plasma membrane.an open question arising from this study is how such cortical tension is regulated by ruffles. to answer it, a complete mechanochemical model considering actin turnover, buckling and adhesion mechanochemistry could be a useful tool. potentially, it could even predict how cues other than viscosity, such as highly confined environments, may affect ruffle formation, which could establish ruffles as more general mechanosensors.elosegui-artola, a. et al. nat. cell biol. 18, 540–548 (2016).article google scholar gong, z. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 115, e2686–e2695 (2018). google scholar simmonds, m. j., meiselman, h. j. & baskurt, o. k. j. geriatr. cardiol. 10, 291 (2013). google scholar lai, s. k., wang, y. y., wirtz, d. & hanes, j. adv. drug deliv. rev. 61, 86–100 (2009).article google scholar pittman, m. et al. nat. phys. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01676-y (2022).matsui, h. et al. j. immunol. 175, 1090–1099 (2005).article google scholar gonzalez-molina, j. et al. biomaterials 177, 113–124 (2018).article google scholar heinemann, f., doschke, h. & radmacher, m. biophys. j. 100, 1420–1427 (2011).ads article google scholar mai, m. h. & camley, b. a. soft matter 16, 1349–1358 (2020).ads article google scholar pontes, b. et al. j. cell biol. 216, 2959–2977 (2017).article google scholar download referencesinstitute for bioengineering of catalonia (ibec), barcelona institute of technology (bist), barcelona, spainlaura m. faure & pere roca-cusachsuniversitat de barcelona, barcelona, spainpere roca-cusachsyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to pere roca-cusachs.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfaure, l.m., roca-cusachs, p. ruffled in water, smooth in honey. nat. phys. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01664-2download citationpublished: 25 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-022-01664-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 