logic-gated monoclonal antibodies have been designed to improve safety and efficacy.you have full access to this article via your institution.since the 1997 approval of rituximab, a monoclonal antibody (mab) drug against lymphoma, mab therapies have been developed for a wide range of cancers. like targeted small-molecule drugs, however, many mab therapies have harmful side effects, in part because the target antigen is expressed on healthy cells1,2. writing in nature biotechnology, oostindie et al3. describe a novel strategy for reducing mab cross-reactivity. they engineer two mabs with distinct specificities that form heterohexamers on the surface of a cell that expresses both antigens. these highly ordered heterohexamers then kill the cell by complement-dependent cytotoxicity (cdc). since the cdc activity requires that both mabs bind and associate with each other, cells that express only one of the antigens are largely unaffected. with further development, this approach holds considerable promise for improving the safety and efficacy of mab therapies.broadening the reach of mabs to antigens with substantial expression on normal tissues has been challenging, and consequently a great deal of research has been devoted to optimizing mab efficacy and safety. one strategy that has attracted recent attention involves engineered conditional logic gates, requiring that two targets be in proximity on the same cell surface to trigger a response. this concept has been achieved preclinically using de novo designed proteins with conditional binding domains4, chimeric antigen receptor t cells with synthetic signaling pathways5, and t cell-engaging antibodies with split cd3 binding domains6.the new work by oostindie et al. extends a previous study7 in which specific mutations in the mab fc domain led to the formation of cell-surface homohexamers that enhanced cdc through increased recruitment of complement complex c1. in a subsequent paper8, mab combinations that formed heterohexamers were shown to have improved efficacy compared with homohexamer-forming constituents. oostindie et al. harness this approach to create logic-gated mabs. they engineer mab constructs designed to oligomerize and trigger cdc only on cells that express both of the antigens recognized by the two mabs (fig. 1). the technology, which they call hexelect, involves the introduction of complementary mutations in residues at the fc–fc mab interfaces, with the aim of enhancing mab efficacy while lowering toxicity on cells expressing only one antigen.fc interaction domains of cd52 (red) and cd20 (yellow) antibodies were engineered with a triplex of mutations that promote the formation of heterohexamers and subsequent complement-dependent cytotoxicity only if both antigens are present.to validate hexelect, the authors generated antibodies targeting cd52 or cd20. cd52 is widely expressed across normal hematologic cell types, whereas cd20 is strictly expressed in mature b cells3. on the first iteration, they introduced hexamer-enhancing mutations e430g plus either k439e or s440k. they found that although these mutations greatly enhanced cdc, both individual antibodies still retained substantial activity as single agents against cells in whole blood, which they attributed to residual clustering and fcγ receptor binding. consequently, they tested a third pair of mutations, g236r and g237a, to prevent any residual activity that could result in or-gated activity. these triple mutants were denoted ‘rge’ for g236r/e430g/k439e or ‘agk’ for g237a/e430g/s440k.a mixture of cd52-campath-rge and cd20-11b8-agk engineered antibodies hit the mark, resulting in potent cdc activity only on cells that expressed both antigens. when applied to whole blood, the antibody combination completely depleted b cells without any effect on t cell populations and showed greater activity than other clinical b cell-targeted therapeutics such as rituximab. the authors confirmed these findings in mice, suggesting that, at least in this context, the triple mutations did not significantly affect pharmacokinetics or activity. forster resonance energy transfer (fret) analysis and direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (dstorm) were used to assess proximity on the cell surface. surprisingly, the expected shift in nearest-neighbor distance with dstorm was not observed, raising questions about the precise mechanism of action on the plasma membrane. last, the authors showed that hexelect mutations could be applied to other antigen and antibody combinations, such as cd3–cd52, cd37–cd20, or death receptor 5 (dr5) antibodies with distinct epitopes.oostindie et al. provide an elegant approach for engineering mab pairs that require heterohexamer formation on cell surfaces to elicit potent cdc activity. as they discuss, the approach could have considerable benefits. unlike de novo-designed protein logic gates4, the mab pairs have minimal sequence divergence from wild-type antibodies and may not be immunogenic. in addition, they are simple to engineer and screen from existing antibody clones. unlike chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cell approaches5, they do not require the design of complex transcriptional regulatory circuits in living cells.however, there are some potential limitations and opportunities to learn more about the technology. although examples are presented with mutually dependent cd52–cd20, cd52–cd3 and cd37–cd20 combinations, the heterohexamer technology is likely to be restricted to targets that are in proximity on the cell surface, have epitopes residing near the membrane, and are present on tumors that are sensitive to cdc. many tumors are not9. the extent to which this approach will translate clinically using antigen pairs that have highly heterogenous expression and stoichiometries remains to be seen. the finding that the anti-cd52-agk construct retained some degree of single-agent function sufficient to induce significant cell depletion suggests that the mutagenesis strategy may not be fully generalizable. finally, there are logistical hurdles surrounding the need to develop and co-administer two separate constructs with similar bioavailabilities. even with these concerns, the initial promising data described by oostindie et al. provide the basis for further validation of this novel heterohexamer approach.christian, b. a. & lin, t. s. semin. hematol. 45, 95–103 (2008).cas article google scholar alinari, l. et al. oncogene 26, 3644–3653 (2007).cas article google scholar oostindie, s. c. et al. nat. biotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01384-1 (2022).article google scholar lajoie, m. j. et al. science 369, 1637–1643 (2020).cas article google scholar roybal, k. t. et al. cell 164, 770–779 (2016).cas article google scholar banaszek, a. et al. nat. commun. 10, 5387 (2019).article google scholar diebolder, c. a. et al. science 343, 1260–1263 (2014).cas article google scholar oostindie, s. c. et al. haematologica 104, 1841–1852 (2019).cas article google scholar macor, p., capolla, s. & tedesco, f. front. immunol. 9, 2203 (2018).article google scholar download referencesseagen, inc., bothell, wa, usarobert t. lawrence & peter d. senteryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to robert t. lawrence or peter d. senter.the authors are employed by seagen, inc.reprints and permissionslawrence, r.t., senter, p.d. precision cancer targeting with antibody pairs. nat biotechnol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01401-3download citationpublished: 25 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01401-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 