certain types of strongly star-forming galaxies have long been thought to lie outside the usual trends in metal abundances followed by other galaxies. a study now reveals the significant effect of dust on observations, bringing these galaxies back into line with models.you have full access to this article via your institution.one of the most important properties in determining how galaxies evolve is their abundance of heavy metals. it is expected that this metallicity correlates with a galaxy’s stellar mass1, because gas in galaxies is steadily transformed to form both stars and heavy elements, for example through supernovas.however, the past few decades of observations have suggested that a particular class of galaxies, known as ultra-luminous infrared galaxies (ulirgs), do not follow this trend, and many galaxy simulations have been run in an attempt to understand why2. writing in nature astronomy, nima chartab and colleagues3 now reveal that ulirgs do indeed have the same metal abundances as non-merging galaxies of the same mass, but obscuration by dust plays a much bigger part than previously thought.ulirgs are amongst the most massive star-forming galaxies, and they are a result of the later phases of galaxy merging, as fig. 1 shows. it appears at odds for ulirgs to be lacking in heavy elements because mergers of galaxies are accompanied by gas compression, resulting in large amounts of star formation, and subsequently formation of dust and heavy elements via supernovas.left: four of the galaxies are shown as a red–green–blue composite image, made using hubble space telescope (hst) observations6 in near-infrared bands at 1.2, 1.6 and 2.1 μm. they are arranged to show a merger sequence: from left to right, top to bottom, the first subpanel (iras f08572+3915) shows two approaching galaxies, while in the second subpanel (iras 12112+0305) two galaxies have interacted and show tidal features. in the third subpanel (iras 15250+3609) two galaxies have merged but the two nuclei are still visible, and finally in iras 17208-0014 the two galaxies have fully merged and are surrounded by strong tides. right: a composite (blue and red) image of mrk 273 from hst observations, showing the gigantic tidal tail that is reminiscent of a toothbrush handle. right panel from nasa hubblesite, nasa/stsci.although dust can result in the full extinction of visible light, far-infrared light is not affected at all, because its wavelength is larger than the dust grain size (~1 μm). to arrive at their result, chartab and the team used the far-infrared emission lines [oiii] 52 μm, [oiii] 88 μm, and [niii] 57 μm, which are mostly emitted from the galaxy cores. the cores are the parts of the galaxies that are usually most affected by dust, as attested by their red appearances in fig. 1. in fact, 99% of the visible light emitted by ulirgs is absorbed by dust and then thermally re-radiated at other infrared wavelengths by the heated dust grains.this result does not mean that former models of merger abundances were wrong, just that they would need different ingredients than previously assumed. for example, some models2 correctly identified that some low-metallicity gas can be brought from the outskirts to the centre by tidal forces and gravitational torques due to disk–disk interactions. however, a rapid enrichment of heavy elements in the core is also expected, due to supernovas occurring alongside the huge amount of star formation.intriguingly, this study of nearby galaxies also affects our understanding of the distant universe. although they are very scarce and represent just a small fraction of the total star formation today, luminous infrared galaxies were much more common six to nine billion years ago and account for at least 50% and possibly up to 90% of the star formation in the distant universe4.the result from chartab and colleagues also affects the long debate about how galactic disks are formed. today most large galaxies have disks, which are thought to form through mergers of older galaxies such as ulirgs5. such a hierarchical sequence was problematic when ulirgs were observed to be chemically different from other galaxies; however, this discrepancy now vanishes as ulirgs are reinserted into the conventional mass–metallicity relation, supporting the hierarchical scenario for all galaxies.there are several future directions of research to consider after the publication of this result, the first being to try to get additional similar measurements in the nearby universe. it would be even more interesting to perform them in the distant universe, where ulirgs dominate. however distant ulirgs are much fainter, and their emission lines are redshifted to the sub-millimetre range. this means that with current facilities, we can study them only at very high redshifts, z > 4.7, with telescopes such as alma, while most of the action is expected from z =1 to z = 3, near the peak of star formation. scientists may have to wait decades before getting a better window onto the peak of star formation in the distant universe.the second direction suggests a revisit of how we model star and heavy-element formation during galaxy interactions. it has often been assumed that strong star formation is immediately followed by strong feedback, which regulates and even prevents further star formation. this expectation is based on the fact that supernovas expel gas at large distances, creating bubbles within which star formation cannot continue. however, we are a long way from understanding the efficiency of supernovas during this process. it is likely that in many numerical simulations the feedback has often been made too efficient in regulating the star formation; this can be tested by modifying the simulations to try to reproduce the ulirgs studied by chartab et al., and shown in fig. 1.future observations by the james webb space telescope will also be affected by dust found in highly star-forming galaxies, so this study highlights the need to treat the mass–metal abundance relation with caution when trying to understand the earliest galaxies in the universe.tremonti, c. a. et al. astrophys. j. 613, 898–913 (2004).ads article google scholar rupke, d. s. n., kewley, l. j. & barnes, j. e. astrophys. j. 710, l156–l160 (2010).ads article google scholar chartab, n. et al. nat. astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01679-y (2022).article google scholar flores, h. et al. astrophys. j. 517, 148 (1999).ads article google scholar hammer, f. et al. astron. astrophys. 430, 115–128 (2005).ads article google scholar scoville, n. z. et al. astron. j. 119, 991 (2000).ads article google scholar download referencesgepi, paris observatory, psl, cnrs, paris, francefrançois hammeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to françois hammer.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionshammer, f. high abundances hidden in the dusty medium. nat astron 6, 776–777 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01735-7download citationpublished: 18 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01735-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 