comparative and evolutionary genomics analyses for more than 1,600 re-sequenced maize lines identified vast amounts of differentially and complementary selected regions and genes among female and male heterotic groups used in modern hybrid maize breeding.you have full access to this article via your institution.the utilization of maize (zea mays) as a major crop for human nutrition and livestock feeding benefited from three major milestones in breeding: the domestication from its wild ancestor teosinte by early native americans, the subsequent improvement of agricultural traits and the exploitation of hybrid vigor that describes the superiority of the f1 offspring to both genetically distinct parents. biparental crosses between maize inbreds show particularly strong heterotic effects pioneered by studies of us researchers at the beginning of the last century1. in the 1930s, us farmers switched from open-pollinated lines to hybrid maize, and today’s worldwide maize growth is almost exclusively based on hybrid maize. along with advances in agricultural technologies, hybrid breeding has increased yield in maize seven-fold since the 1940s. however, while some biparental crosses produce strong hybrid vigour, crosses of other parental lines show only minor or even no heterotic effects. consequently, breeders assorted temperate maize lines into two meta-level groups, the male (mhg) and female (fhg) heterotic group, each in turn comprising several genetically diverse sub-populations or heterotic groups. hybrids from inter-group crosses are more likely to show increased vigour, while intra-group crosses generally produce weaker hybrid vigour. in this issue of nature plants, li and colleagues report a unique genomic study on the two heterotic groups, which deepens our understanding of how breeding shapes maize evolution and the mechanism of maize heterosis.after its domestication, maize retained a large proportion of the diversity of its ancestor teosinte, and modern maize lines are genetically as distinct as, for example, human and chimpanzee lines2. this rich genetic resource has been exploited worldwide by farmers and breeders to select favourable alleles, increase yield and qualities, and adapt subtropical maize to a broad range of climate zones and micro-environments.to understand the impact of this artificial selection on fhg and mhg, li et al. re-sequenced a panel of 1,604 elite maize lines comprising mostly us and chinese elite maize lines and derived from two historical breeding eras, before (era i) and after (era ii) the year 2000. consistent with former classifications and pedigree information, genome-wide snp variation grouped the lines into 11 phylogenetic and 9 heterotic subpopulations, and into the two major groups fhg and mhg. the division of the panel into heterotic groups at several hierarchical levels and into two breeding periods allowed the authors to measure phenotypic differences between heterotic groups and to track historical changes within one group.in line with previous reports, fhg plants from era i had significantly higher yield and yield-related traits, while ear length and tassel brunch numbers were larger for the era i mhg lines. however, comparison between the older and modern breeding period revealed several very interesting and novel insights. progressing from era i to ii, mhg lines showed significant changes in 18 out of 21 traits, while significant changes were observed in only 10 traits in the fhg plants. apparently, the former group has undergone substantially more artificial selection in the modern breeding era, and these changes occurred at geographically distinct sites. noteworthy, traits were not uniformly selected, and both divergent and convergent changes were observed for the two major heterotic groups. both groups experienced a decrease in flowering time and an increase in yield and plant architecture related traits, but they showed divergent trends for three traits potentially related to dehydration rate. to gain molecular details on the observed morphological changes, snps were linked to measured phenotypes by a genome-wide association study (gwas). consistent with the direction of changes in the morphological traits, frequencies of favourable alleles increased both in mhg and fhg for convergently selected traits and diverged for anti-directional traits.candidate genes identified by gwas were complemented by genome-wide scans for selective sweeps and regions of genetic differentiation by applying xp-clr and fst statistics, respectively. the impact of artificial selection in maize seems to be very broad: more than 18,000 selective sweeps containing almost 17,000 genes were identified, suggesting that around one third of the maize genome experienced selection during maize breeding. strikingly, each cross-heterotic comparison shared only a small number of differentiated genes with other comparisons. the observed low overlaps indicate that improvement during modern maize breeding frequently targeted distinct genomic regions and genes. many of these genes are involved in classic breeding traits like plant architecture, flowering time, kernel development or abiotic stress responses.but how do the identified candidate genes relate to heterosis and how can they help to survey the impact of artificial selection in modern maize lines on this phenomenon? the authors addressed these questions both by a systematic genome-wide study and by a single-gene proof-of-concept study. in field experiments and f1 test crosses of four common heterotic patterns, the authors surveyed the impact of heterozygous non-synonymous snps on grain yield per plant. while heterozygosity in non-divergent genes showed no or only very minor effects, heterozygosity at genes differentiated between the respective heterotic pair significantly correlated with increased grain yield per plant and with better parent heterosis, strongly supporting that these regions promote hybrid vigour in maize. crispr/cas9 knockouts and overexpression of zmkob1, an arabidopsis abi8 homologue, mimicked heterotic effects of two haplotypes divergently selected in a heterotic pair. this example demonstrates a potential role in heterosis for their identified candidate genes.in summary, the rich resource provided by li et al. opens numerous starting points to study the impact of improvement on gene functions, pathways and heterosis in maize. their atlas of artificially selected variation between heterotic groups complements previous large-scale work on domestication and variation maps in maize3,4. observed variation of this study was limited to snp alleles and did not cover structural and copy number variations, which are numerously found in maize and provide an important source of genetic differentiation and hybrid vigour5,6. nevertheless, full future exploitation of their results will be a tremendous but highly rewarding task for both targeted breeding programs and for approaches that aim to understand molecular mechanisms of how particular genes act in maize improvement and heterosis.hochholdinger, f. & baldauf, j. a. curr. biol. 28, 1089–1092 (2018).article google scholar tenaillon, m. i. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 98, 9161–9166 (2001).cas article google scholar hufford, m. b. et al. nat. genet. 44, 808–811 (2012).cas article google scholar bukowski, r. et al. gigascience 7, gix134 (2018).article google scholar hufford, m. b. et al. science 373, 655–662 (2021).cas article google scholar yang, n. et al. nat. genet. 51, 1052–1059 (2019).cas article google scholar download referencesplant genome and systems biology, helmholtz center munich, neuherberg, germanygeorg haberer & klaus f. x. mayerschool of life sciences, technical university munich, munich, germanyklaus f. x. mayeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to georg haberer or klaus f. x. mayer.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionshaberer, g., mayer, k.f.x. differential and complementary selection of heterotic groups. nat. plants 8, 727–728 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01192-0download citationpublished: 18 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01192-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 