one of the key targets for further development of sodium-ion batteries is to improve their cycle life. now, an electrolyte formulation is proposed to tackle the dissolution of both the solid-electrolyte interphases and the transition metals in cathodes, leading to enhanced cyclability.you have full access to this article via your institution.until recently, sodium-ion batteries (nibs) were often seen as an inherently inferior storage technology in their performance to commercialised lithium-ion batteries (libs). however, great progress has now been made in the development of nibs and their energy and power densities have started to rival some libs1,2,3. the cycle life of nibs, on the other hand, remains an urgent research topic.three effects are generally believed to limit the cycle life of nibs (fig. 1a). first, the electrode–electrolyte interphases — which are formed during cycling and play important roles in maintaining the cell reversibility — seem inherently more soluble than their lithium counterparts4. second, the transition metals of the cathode have a tendency to leach out into the electrolyte5. third, electrode phase transitions can lead to structural degradation5. in practice, the first two problems are conventionally addressed by adding additives — solvents or salts in small quantities — to the electrolyte. owing to the interplay between the electrode active materials and the electrolyte, tailoring of the electrolyte formulation is therefore key to improving the performance of nibs.a, using a conventional electrolyte (such as 1 mol napf6 per liter ethylene carbonate:ethyl methyl carbonate (ec:emc)), continuous sei dissolution and reformation occurs on the anode side (with the colour gradient representing the continuous decomposition of the electrolyte), while transition metal dissolution occurs on the cathode, both effects leading to capacity fading over time. b, by making use of weak non-polar solvents and solvation shells containing anions, the research team are able to form an sei rich in insoluble inorganic compounds and suppress the transition metal dissolution, thus solving the dissolution of the sei and transition metals, and greatly enhancing the cycle life of the cell. ec, emc and pf6– are shown in a whereas tfp, dmc and fsi– are shown in b. the coloured spheres represent hydrogen (light grey), carbon (dark grey), nitrogen (blue), oxygen (red), fluorine (light blue), sulphur (yellow) and phosphorus (orange).writing in nature energy6, ji-guang zhang and colleagues from the pacific northwest national laboratory in the usa analyse electrolyte design principles and present a high-performance electrolyte composition for nibs. they show that their new electrolyte greatly increases the cyclability of a high-voltage (4.2 v) hard carbon nani0.68mn0.22co0.1o2 (nmc) full cell. it retains almost 95% of its original capacity after 300 cycles, compared to just 28% capacity retention with a conventional electrolyte over the same number of cycles.the researchers achieved the enhanced cyclability by setting forth two design criteria. first, both the solid-electrolyte interphase (sei) on the anode and the cathode–electrolyte interphase (cei) on the cathode should contain a large amount of insoluble inorganic decomposition products. following know-how elucidating in recent research into electrolytes for various batteries7, inorganic-rich sei and cei can be achieved by increasing the presence of anions in the solvation shell and drastically reducing the amount of free solvent molecules. these approaches enhance the electrochemical stability of the solvent, suppress their reduction into organic-rich compounds, and favour reaction pathways where anions decompose, forming the sought-after inorganic sei and cei. second, the solubility power of the electrolyte should be kept to a minimum, hence low-polar solvents should be used. fulfilling these criteria, zhang and colleagues contemplated, should end the continuous interphase dissolution and reformation, as well as suppress the transition metal dissolution. the question was then what combination of solvents and salts best fulfils these criteria.first, the research team selected a low-polarity solvent, tris (2,2,2-trifluroeethyl) phosphate (tfp), to minimize the ability of the electrolyte to dissolve the sei. while the benefit of using non-polar solvents such as ethers is already explored for nibs8,9, these solvents are so far not considered to be compatible with high voltage cathodes. as a known flame-retardant, tfp has the additional benefit of rendering the electrolyte non-flammable.the research team then added another low-polar solvent, dimethyl carbonate (dmc), to the electrolyte. meanwhile, they also slightly increased the concentration of the salt, sodium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (nafsi). this aimed at reducing the amount of free solvents in the electrolyte and increasing the amount of anions in the first solvation shell of na ions so that the interphases would be stabilised. in addition, dmc also has the added benefit of increasing the electrolyte conductivity. through ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, zhang and colleagues showed that their electrolyte indeed possesses very few free solvent molecules and there are indeed plenty of anions (fsi–) in the cationic solvation shells. the researchers subsequently quantified the dissolution of sei and cei and showed no appreciable dissolution of the interphases (fig. 1b). they also confirmed experimentally that the interphases are rich in inorganic compounds.in a nib with a conventional electrolyte and the nmc cathode, zhang and team detected ni on both the cathode and anode surfaces. this indicates the dissolution of the transition metal from the cathode, which can cause the cell capacity to fade. in contrast, they showed no ni on the electrode surfaces when the new electrolyte was used (fig. 1). similarly, while phase transitions in cathodes are typically linked to poor cycle life, the researchers showed that the phase transitions are much more reversible with the new electrolyte.overall, the study by zhang and colleagues nicely highlights how a careful and rational design of the electrolyte at the molecular level can solve the problem of capacity fading for both the cathode and anode, yielding a full cell with superior cycle life.nevertheless, fundamental aspects of the work — especially those concerning the sei/cei formation — could benefit from further exploration. for example, future work could focus on the influence of the cycling protocol during the first formation cycles and the influence of the electrode materials. because the morphology and chemical composition of electrode materials affect how they react with electrolytes, the performance of the designed electrolyte in the work of zhang and team might not necessarily be transferable to full cells with other active materials. finally, it should be recognized that commercial full cell nibs have produced exceptionally good capacity retention over thousands of cycles10. there is therefore plenty of room for improvement in terms of achieving long-term cyclability.catl unveils its latest breakthrough technology by releasing its first generation of sodium-ion batteries. catl https://www.catl.com/en/news/665.html (2021).rudola, a. et al. j. material. chem. 9, 8279–8302 (2021).article google scholar li, y. et al. nat. energy 7, 511–519 (2022).article google scholar ma, l. a., naylor, a. j., nyholm, l. & younesi, r. angew. chem. int. ed. 60, 4855–4863 (2021).article google scholar you, y. & manthiram, a. adv. energy mater. 8, 1701785 (2018).article google scholar jin, y. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01055-0 (2022).article google scholar li, m., wang, c., chen, z., xu, k. & lu, j. chem. rev. 120, 6783–6819 (2020).article google scholar goktas, m. et al. adv. energy mater. 8, 1702724 (2018).article google scholar westman, k. et al. acs appl. energy mater. 1, 2671–2680 (2018).article google scholar zhou, q. et al. chinese phys. lett. 38, 076501 (2021).article google scholar download referenceshumboldt university of berlin, berlin, germanygustav åvall & philipp adelhelmhelmholtz-zentrum berlin, berlin, germanyphilipp adelhelmyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to gustav åvall or philipp adelhelm.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsåvall, g., adelhelm, p. solution to dissolution. nat energy 7, 682–683 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01079-6download citationpublished: 18 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01079-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 