the management of introduced species, whether kudzu or zebra mussels, is costly and complex. now, a paper reports a workable, effective solution that harnesses network analyses of ecological phenomena.you have full access to this article via your institution.invasive species can pose severe economic and environmental problems, costing more than us$1 trillion worldwide since 1970 (ref. 1). yet managing this human-driven issue is difficult in itself. the regions involved can be vast — entire continents or countries, for instance — while budgets are typically limited. as well, the sites potentially affected and management options can be numerous. real systems (for example, all the lakes in the united states) can have thousands of locations that could potentially be infested. by contrast, considering just 40 locations means dealing theoretically with over 1 trillion unique combinations (240) where management could be applied (for instance, to reduce the number of invasive species leaving infested areas or entering uninfested ones). given these constraints, a key problem is how and where to deploy control measures such as invasive-species removal. while sophisticated optimization approaches exist2, which use mathematical rules to exclude most suboptimal combinations and quickly zoom in to which locations should be managed to minimize new invasions, these algorithms are generally unfeasible for very large systems. now, writing in nature sustainability, ashander et al.3 demonstrate that simpler network metrics revealing linkages between patches can provide solutions that are often comparable to the more complex optimization algorithms.many ecological phenomena have been represented as networks, for instance to show disease spread4, food webs5 or the pet trade6. basically, theoretical developments in network analyses can be applied to any phenomenon that can be described as having ‘nodes’ (some entity of interest, such as an individual person, species or location) and ‘edges’ (the connections between nodes). in the context of biological invasions, nodes can represent regions or locations where a given species may establish, while edges represent human activities that effectively shunt species between these locations. in a network framework, properties of the system, such as how many connections exist between each node, provide convenient metrics that potentially could be used to prioritize management, such as allocating resources to locations with the most connections.as a case study, ashander et al. applied network analysis to invasions of the more than 9,000 inland lakes in minnesota, usa (fig. 1), by the zebra mussel (dreissena polymorpha), one of the most damaging non-native species in north america. zebra mussels are generally transported from infested waters to uninfested lakes (nodes) by recreational boaters (edges). lakes where greater numbers of infested boats are deployed (larger edge weight) will logically have a higher chance of becoming invaded. thus, the management strategy to reduce new invasions is often inspection and cleaning of boats7. this can be costly, however, so prioritizing which lakes should be managed is crucial and the focus of the paper3. another challenge is that data are often limited, and decisions will need to be made in conditions of relative uncertainty. zebra mussels are widely studied, and a lot of data exist on both the movement of boaters (social data) and the water bodies infested (ecological data). but for many other invasive species, comparable data are lacking. thus, ashander et al. also examined the performance of network metrics under the scenarios where social and/or ecological information are unavailable. their analysis covered 58 counties, and for each they calculated the number of potentially infested boats that would be found using network metrics as a heuristic (that is, network-guided inspections), compared to complex optimization algorithms that identify the best combination of lakes to inspect (that is, optimal inspection).a,b, stylized image of a simple network of nodes (circles) and edges (lines) (b) superimposed on the minnesota inland lake system (a). nodes represent lakes, with larger circles representing greater traffic, and edges represent the connections between lakes due to boater traffic. credit for a: © openstreetmap contributors.what ashander et al. found was that with full social and ecological data, network-guided inspections found as many infested boats as inspections based on optimization algorithms. even under conditions where less data were available (where the invasion status or number of boater movements were not known, for instance), the network metrics still often performed well. using the median performance from the 58 counties, network metrics found 80% as many infested boats as compared with optimal inspections. further, in situations with less available data, the network-guided inspections generally performed better with larger numbers of lakes. this is important, as optimization approaches become unfeasible with larger systems, while heuristics, such as network metrics, function well under these conditions.there are several caveats. first, while median performance was consistently good, results were more variable with less data, and failure (defined by the authors as less than 66% of infested boats found as compared with optimal inspections) could occur in approximately 30% of counties in minnesota. second, the good performance observed in the study3 may solely reflect the specific conditions of zebra mussels in minnesota lakes; further testing will be needed to show whether the technique will work with other systems and species. also, while not discussed by ashander et al., it is possible that the improving performance of network metrics with larger numbers of lakes depends on the choice of measurement — they modelled the per cent of potential lakes managed, but absolute numbers may be just as important. for illustration, if 10% of lakes were managed based on their ranking of importance in the network, a system with ten lakes would have just one managed, while a system with 1,000 lakes would have 100 managed. if simultaneously relatively few lakes contribute to many infestations, managing a higher absolute number of lakes may be more likely to encompass the few high-risk lakes. in this illustrative small system, the single managed lake would have to also be the most risky (that is, there is little room for error), but in the large system, the few high-risk lakes could occur anywhere in the 100 managed lakes, with the same benefit. this does not negate the relevance of these results3 but may suggest conditions (for example, few risky lakes, large absolute number of managed lakes) where network metrics can work well, even with limited data. regardless, the findings of ashander et al. suggest a promising avenue for making management decisions on invasive species across a relatively large region, which should inspire additional research.diagne, c. et al. sci. data 7, 277 (2020).cas article google scholar ball, i. r., possingham, h. p. & watts, m. e. in spatial conservation prioritization: quantitative methods and computational tools 185–195 (oxford univ. press, 2009).ashander, j. et al. nat. sustain. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00913-9 (2022).article google scholar nowzari, c., preciado, v. m. & pappas, g. j. ieee control syst. 36, 26–46 (2016). google scholar mcdonald-madden, e. et al. nat. commun. 7, 10245 (2016).cas article google scholar sinclair, j. s. et al. bioscience 71, 977–990 (2021).article google scholar johnson, l. e., ricciardi, a. & carlton, j. t. ecol. appl. 11, 1789–1799 (2001).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of biology, mcgill university, montreal, quebec, canadabrian leungbieler school of environment, mcgill university, montreal, quebec, canadabrian leungyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to brian leung.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsleung, b. network metrics guide good control choices. nat sustain (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00927-3download citationpublished: 14 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00927-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 