general catalytic methods for free radical-mediated asymmetric transformations have long eluded synthetic organic chemists. now, nad(p)h-dependent ketoreductases are repurposed and engineered as highly efficient photoenzymes to catalyse asymmetric radical c–c couplings.you have full access to this article via your institution.radical reactions have found important applications spanning all disciplines of chemical synthesis. in small-molecule chemistry, radical-mediated carbon–carbon bond forming reactions have been widely implemented in the total synthesis of complex natural products. in the realm of macromolecule synthesis, radical polymerization methods have now become an indispensable tool to access polymeric materials. despite the already significant utility of radical chemistry, general methods to enable catalytic asymmetric free radical-mediated reactions have long eluded synthetic chemists. in part due to their highly reactive nature, taming fleeting radical intermediates for stereoselective catalysis is a notoriously difficult problem. moreover, maintaining tight association between the chiral catalyst and the free radical intermediate and/or the radicalphile is oftentimes a nontrivial task, further limiting the substrate and reaction classes amenable to asymmetric radical catalysis1,2.as nature’s privileged catalysts, enzymes are capable of facilitating an array of biochemical transformations with unparalleled stereoselectivities, thereby providing a promising solution to challenging problems in asymmetric catalysis. however, until recently, the catalytic repertoire of enzymes has been largely limited to reactions found in nature. thus, bringing new catalytic functions to naturally occurring enzymes can dramatically expand the reach of enzymology, ultimately leading to powerful biocatalysts to dramatically expand synthetic chemist’s toolbox. in this regard, over the past five years, drawing inspiration from synthetic organic chemistry, researchers have been able to design and develop stereoselective biocatalytic reactions that have not been previously encountered in nature, including those following a radical mechanism. using visible light to unveil the one-electron reaction manifold of nicotinamide and flavin cofactors, the groups of hyster and zhao pioneered a photoenzymatic strategy to catalyse diverse new-to-nature enantioselective radical reactions3,4. by leveraging the innate redox properties of first-row transition-metal cofactors found in natural metalloenzymes, the yang group recently introduced a metalloredox strategy for stereoselective unnatural radical biocatalysis5. at present, the identification and evolution of promiscuous enzymes to engage other challenging asymmetric free radical reactions continue to represent the forefront of this burgeoning area of research.now, writing in nature catalysis, huimin zhao, binju wang and colleagues unlock the potential of nad(p)h-dependent ketoreductases (kreds) as photoredox enzymes to catalyse asymmetric radical c–c bond formation in an intermolecular fashion (fig. 1a)6.a, overall photoenzymatic transformation. gdh, glucose dehydrogenase. b, evolved kred variant. illustration was made on the basis of a closely related kred (pdb id: 4rf2). c, proposed reaction mechanism. ewg, electron-withdrawing group.in their native biochemistry, kreds catalyse hydride transfer reactions from their nicotinamide cofactor to the carbonyl substrate often with excellent enantioselectivities. inspired by nicotinamide-mediated, photoinduced decarboxylative conjugate addition reactions previously developed by synthetic chemists, the authors envisioned that the enantioselective radical c–c bond formation could be accomplished with nicotinamide-dependent enzymes upon visible light irradiation using n-(acyloxy)phthalimides as the radical precursor. the authors commenced their investigation by evaluating commercially available enzymes from codexis’s kred kit. initial hits with high levels of enantioselectivity were quickly identified without any protein engineering, among which the optimal result was found using a triple mutant of the kred from lactobacillus kefir (20% yield and 91:9 enantiomeric ratio (e.r.)).with these initial results in hand, the researchers obtained a crystal structure of the best performing enzyme variant and proceeded to perform structure-guided protein engineering. first, docking the c–c bond formation product into the enzyme’s active site revealed ten potentially important residues for this new-to-nature radical biocatalytic process. next, in lieu of using iterative site-saturation mutagenesis, the authors opted to generate small focused libraries for their enzyme engineering. the steric property of key active site residues was used as the sole parameter for enzyme library generation, and only 3–5 amino acid residues with varying steric profiles, including a/g, l/i and f were evaluated. this site-directed mutagenesis led to a small, yet high-quality library of 30 enzyme mutants. screening this focused library against the model reaction afforded an improved enzyme variant with higher enantioselectivity. in this way, three rounds of protein engineering were performed, eventually resulting in the final variant with three beneficial mutations, including l199a, m205f and m206f (fig. 1b). under the optimized reaction conditions, this final variant afforded the desired radical conjugate addition product in 79% yield and 95.5:4.5 e.r. this engineered enzyme readily accommodated a wide range of substrate combinations. a variety of redox-active esters, which are precursors to diverse benzylic and aliphatic radicals — including primary, secondary and tertiary ones — underwent this biocatalytic transformation with good to excellent enantioselectivities.next, the researchers performed computational studies to gain insights into the enzymatic reaction mechanism and the origin of enantioselectivity. based on their study, the authors propose that the nicotinamide cofactor of the enzyme first engages the redox-active ester to form a charge-transfer complex (fig. 1c). photoinduced electron transfer of this charge-transfer complex leads to the formation of a carboxyl radical, which rapidly decarboxylates to provide a nucleophilic alkyl radical. this nascent alkyl radical intermediate then quickly adds to the methacrylate substrate to furnish a new electrophilic radical intermediate. final hydrogen atom transfer from the nicotinamide radical cation to this electrophilic radical provides the conjugate addition product and completes the catalytic cycle. the computational model allows one to infer that the binding of the methacrylate substrate dictates the enantioselectivity. this finding is in contrast to some of the previously developed photoenzymatic reactions using ene reductases, where the hydrogen atom transfer step is enantiodetermining.overall, the elegant work from zhao, wang and colleagues7 further expands the catalytic repertoire of unnatural biocatalytic reactions to encompass a synthetically valuable intermolecular asymmetric radical coupling. although nad(p)h-dependent enzymes have been previously repurposed as photoenzymes for single-electron-transfer processes, radical c–c bond formation was considered a challenging objective with these systems, in part due to the rapid radical termination via hydrogen atom transfer. the present study dispels this notion and demonstrates the potential of kreds and related nad(p)h-dependent enzymes to facilitate productive c–c bond formation via the intermediacy of transient radicals. most notably, this enzyme activity is demonstrated in the context of intermolecular radical coupling, a process that is not easily achieved in unnatural radical biocatalysis. in principle, once the nascent radical species is formed, it will undergo various side reactions if not positioned in proximity to the radicalphile. to circumvent the unproductive decay of highly reactive radical intermediates, previously developed ene-reductase-based intermolecular radical processes hinge on the formation of a ternary complex to ensure rapid radical addition to the 2π component. although this design is ingenious, it may pose constraints on the types of radical coupling partners that can be employed in photoenzymatic catalysis. the work from zhao, wang and colleagues indicates the availability of alternative mechanisms for intermolecular radical biocatalysis, highlighting exciting new avenues to design enantioselective radical reactions that are not previously encountered in the biological world.sibi, m. p., manyem, s. & zimmerman, j. chem. rev. 103, 3263–3296 (2003).cas article google scholar mondal, s. et al. chem. rev. 122, 5842–5936 (2022).cas article google scholar sandoval, b. a. & hyster, t. k. curr. opin. chem. biol. 55, 45–51 (2020).cas article google scholar harrison, w., huang, x. & zhao, h. acc. chem. res. 55, 1087–1096 (2022).cas article google scholar zhou, q., chin, m., fu, y., liu, p. & yang, y. science 374, 1612–1616 (2021).cas article google scholar huang, x. et al. nat. catal. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00777-4 (2022).article google scholar emmanuel, m. a., greenberg, n. r., oblinsky, d. g. & hyster, t. k. nature 540, 414–417 (2016).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of chemistry and biochemistry, university of california santa barbara, santa barbara, ca, usarui guo, heyu chen & yang yangbiomolecular science and engineering (bmse) program, university of california santa barbara, santa barbara, ca, usayang yangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to yang yang.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsguo, r., chen, h. & yang, y. photoenzymes for radical c–c coupling. nat catal 5, 582–583 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00813-3download citationpublished: 22 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00813-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 