infrequently dosed, longer-acting antiretroviral agents are making adherence to medication easier, leading to better outcomes for those living with hiv or at risk of infection.you have full access to this article via your institution.the breakthrough of highly active combination antiviral therapy for hiv has revolutionized outcomes for this incurable viral infection. individuals who adhere to their daily antiviral regimen can achieve viral suppression, leading to immune restoration and normalization of life span. this has been made more readily achievable with simplified regimens consisting of a single combination pill taken once daily and with improved tolerability compared to earlier options. however, even with these improvements, many young people with this stigmatizing disease have difficulty taking even one pill daily for the rest of their lives. poor adherence to medication can lead to antiviral resistance mutations, and, ironically, second-line therapies prescribed after first-line drug resistance arises are likely to be more frequently dosed (every 12 hours) and less tolerable, and to involve a greater pill burden.one way to improve treatment adherence is to prolong the dosing interval — an approach that is not exclusive to hiv and has shown a substantial effect on adherence in the context of other chronic conditions, such as schizophrenia1. in the case of hiv, antiviral agents that are potent and can be formulated in longer-acting injectable formulations are now becoming available. two recent studies highlight progress in long-acting antiviral therapy in the setting of both hiv treatment and prevention, respectively. in a recent issue of the new england journal of medicine, segal‑maurer et al. describe a randomized study of long-acting lenacapavir treatment for drug-resistant hiv2; and in the lancet, delany-moretlwe et al. report on a much larger phase 3 trial of the long-acting form of the integrase inhibitor cabotegravir (cab la) for hiv prevention in african women3. these studies are not the first, or the last, to describe such strategies, as years of research into long-acting antiviral therapies are now coming to fruition.the most recently approved, currently being scaled up, is a regimen including the long-acting injectable rilpivirine (a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor) and cab la that can be administered as two intramuscular injections every 1–2 months in patients who are virally suppressed4. these treatments are also available for first-line use if preferred and where there are no other contraindications. although a 1–2-monthly injectable is very exciting, the latest antiviral to be produced as a long-acting agent is the very promising 6-monthly lenacapavir. lenacapavir is the first in a novel class of antivirals known as hiv-1 capsid inhibitors, which interfere with viral replication both early and late in the viral life cycle5.in their study, segal‑maurer et al.2 enrolled 72 patients with multidrug-resistant hiv-1 infection who had limited treatment options, 68 of whom are still participating in the trial. they reported that single-agent lenacapavir — administered subcutaneously every 6 months — led to a significant decrease in viral load compared with placebo. in combination with optimized background therapy (received by all patients, irrespective of treatment arm), lenacapavir also led to a high rate of virological suppression, along with evidence of immune restoration, the latter being critical for survival in these heavily treated individuals. the extent of viral resistance mutations to background therapy in these patients suggests that they were deriving benefit from the lenacapavir treatment, despite evidence that resistance to lenacapavir was also beginning to occur. interestingly, previous evidence suggests that mutations that confer resistance to lenacapavir also weaken the ability of hiv-1 to replicate6. it is thought this may have conferred some clinical benefit to the patients in this study. that said, combinations of more than one long-acting agent may reduce the risk of incurred resistance in the longer term — suggesting a need for more long-acting formulations acting on diverse targets in the viral life cycle.long-acting agents are also now being developed for hiv prevention — including the 6-monthly formulation of lenacapavir — and several exciting trials of lenacapavir are currently underway in multiple settings and diverse populations to assess its efficacy, such as the purpose trials assessing it as pre-exposure prophylaxis (prep; nct04994509, nct04925752). hiv prep is a proven intervention in which hiv-negative individuals take antiretroviral agents before potential hiv exposure to protect against hiv acquisition. this is analogous to contraception to prevent unintended pregnancies in women of childbearing age. although the oral hormonal pill revolutionized women’s lives by enabling family planning, many of the same adherence challenges that apply to daily hiv pill-taking also apply to daily contraceptives. the advent of long-acting reversible contraceptives in the form of depot injectables, implants, hormonal vaginal rings and intrauterine devices have allowed many more women to have their diverse needs met over the course of their reproductive lives, leading to better adherence and contraceptive outcomes7.prep for hiv prevention was first approved in 2012 as a daily pill of two antiviral agents — emtricitabine and tenofovir diphosphate (ftc/tdf) — in combination. although this regimen is efficacious when followed, some studies have shown inconsistent adherence over time and poor ongoing use, particularly among younger people8. in the phase 3 hptn 084 study (a double-blind, double-dummy randomized trial in southern africa), delany-moretlwe et al.3 reported a remarkable 89% reduction in hiv acquisition among women given injectable cab la intramuscularly every 8 weeks, when compared with women given oral daily ftc/tdf. the former is the same injectable included in the recently approved combination regimen with rilpivirine for hiv treatment, mentioned above. monotherapy poses less of a resistance threat in the context of hiv prevention than in the treatment setting, but trials have shown that it is crucial to ensure that individuals initiating cab la are indeed hiv negative, to reduce the risk of drug resistance. this may require viral antigen testing as opposed to rapid antibody testing, to ensure accurate results.with the prospect of just six injections a year with cab-la ± rilpivirine — or even just two in the case of lenacapavir — the daily adherence woes for some may be a thing of the past. however, it is important to note that despite the challenges associated with daily pills, progress in hiv service delivery has meant that several months’ worth of pills can be prescribed at once; pills can be couriered, administered by lay peers and even delivered via automated vending machines. by contrast, the need for healthcare professionals to administer injectable therapy (even long-acting ones) may, counterintuitively, mean more visits to health facilities, more stigma and less convenience for some patients. at least for now, the injectables described here require administration by a trained health professional. rilpivirine and cab la are quite voluminous intramuscular injections best administered into the buttock muscle. it is hoped that the subcutaneous lenacapavir could be administered into the thigh or another body part, allowing the possibility of self-administration.over the next few years, as these agents are rolled out, their value and impact will become better understood. for now, there is great hope that these longer-acting options herald a new era in hiv prevention and treatment, bringing more tailored care and better outcomes for patients with hiv, as well as those at risk of infection.stevens, g. l. et al. early intervention psych. 10, 365–377 (2016).article google scholar segal‑maurer, s. et al. n. engl. j. med. 386, 1793–1803 (2022).article google scholar delany-moretlwe, s. et al. lancet 399, 1779–1789 (2022).cas article google scholar us food and drug administration. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/human-immunodeficiency-virus-hiv/fda-approves-cabenuva-and-vocabria-treatment-hiv-1-infection (accessed june 2022).dvory-sobol, h., shaik, n., callebaut, c. & rhee, m. s. curr. opin. hiv aids 17, 15–21 (2022).cas article google scholar link, j. o. et al. nature 584, 614–618 (2020).cas article google scholar shoupe, d. contracept. reprod. med. 1, 4 (2016).article google scholar hosek, s. et al. j. intl aids soc. 19, 21107 (2016).article google scholar download referencesthe desmond tutu hiv centre, institute of infectious disease and molecular medicine and department of medicine, university of cape town, cape town, south africalinda-gail bekkeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to linda-gail bekker.the author has received honoraria for advisory roles to gilead sciences, viiv health care, johnson and johnson and merck pty ltd.reprints and permissionsbekker, lg. long-acting agents for hiv treatment and prevention. nat med 28, 1542–1543 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01917-wdownload citationpublished: 22 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-022-01917-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 