this genome watch highlights how studying endosymbiotic gene transfer in more recently established endosymbioses sheds light on how the algal plastid evolved more than a billion years ago.you have full access to this article via your institution.endosymbiotic events led to the first photosynthetic eukaryotic cell through the engulfing of a cyanobacterium. what we today call the chloroplast or plastid, an organelle inside of all photosynthetic algal and plant cells, started as a cyanobacterial endosymbiont. over time, the endosymbiont relinquished most of its genetic material and control to the host, through the phenomenon of endosymbiotic gene transfer (egt)1. as this process began more than a billion years ago, it is difficult to discern the steps giving rise to successful egt by looking at modern plastids and their hosts. therefore, studying egt in organisms in which an intimate relationship between the host and the symbiont is more recent enables us to test hypotheses about the mechanisms by which the host acquires and maintains symbiont genetic material successfully.paulinella is a genus of kingdom rhizaria, a clade of largely heterotrophic phagocytic amoebae. some paulinella species are capable of photoautotrophy, using an endosymbiotic organelle called a chromatophore, which is analogous to the plastid in all other algae and plants, but is descended from a different cyanobacterium that established its endosymbiosis ~100 mya. the chromatophore genome is a greatly reduced cyanobacterial genome, with many genes lost from the organelle but encoded in the host eukaryotic nucleus after egt2. calatrava et al.3 searched the paulinella micropora nuclear genome for genes lost from the chromatophore genome and induced transcriptionally by high-light conditions. they found members of three gene families, all well described in cyanobacteria: psae, psai and hli. the nuclear genome has three copies of psae, two of which are pseudogenes, and four families of hli, each of which seem to have been independently transferred to the nucleus before subsequent duplication. most of these psae and hli copies carry the hallmarks of retrotransposition. the authors suggest that retrotransposition may have a major role in egt and that the existence of an active retrotransposition system in an endosymbiotic host may predispose it to egt. whether this was also true of egt genes in all other algae and plants has so far not been demonstrated; those egt events happened so much longer ago that the traces of retrotransposition may be too slight to detect with present methods.egt proteins that continue to have a role in plastid structure and function must return to the plastid after transcription and translation. a chromatophore transit peptide (crtp) has been described, which has an adaptor protein complex 1 domain that recruits clathrin for vesicular transport4. recently, oberleitner et al.5 isolated paulinella chromatophora chromatophores and extracted the protein set of the organelle, and they proposed that crtp proteins are transported to the chromatophore via clathrin-coated vesicles, after which at least part of the crtp is cleaved off. thus, paulinella evolved a mechanism completely different from all other algae and plants to traffic host proteins required by the organelle.as both these studies illustrate, this amoeba and its chromatophore are an example of convergent evolution, whereby the presumptive selective pressures towards a stable and efficient photosynthetic symbiosis are achieved through evolutionary events distinct from those leading to most other algae and plants and their plastid. the opportunity to peer into such a relatively recent evolutionary transition from an endosymbiont to a fully-fledged organelle provides insights into the potential evolutionary past of plastids. future applications of multiple omics techniques to dissect the paulinella–chromatophore interactions are likely to shed light on additional mechanisms and adaptations that enabled this primary endosymbiosis event.brown, j. r. ancient horizontal gene transfer. nat. rev. genet. 4, 121–132 (2003).cas article google scholar lhee, d. et al. amoeba genome reveals dominant host contribution to plastid endosymbiosis. mol. biol. evol. 38, 344–357 (2021).cas article google scholar calatrava, v. et al. retrotransposition facilitated the establishment of a primary plastid in the thecate amoeba. paulinella. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 119, e2121241119 (2022).cas article google scholar singer, a. et al. massive protein import into the early-evolutionary-stage photosynthetic organelle of the amoeba paulinella chromatophora. curr. biol. 27, 2763–2773.e5 (2017).cas article google scholar oberleitner, l., perrar, a., macorano, l., huesgen, p. f. & nowack, e. c. m. a bipartite chromatophore transit peptide and n-terminal protein processing in the paulinella chromatophore. plant physiol. 189, 152–164 (2022).article google scholar download referencesdoe joint genome institute, lawrence berkeley national laboratory, berkeley, ca, usabishoy kamel & alan kuoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to bishoy kamel or alan kuo.reprints and permissionskamel, b., kuo, a. an amoeba and a cyanobacterium walk into a bar.... nat rev microbiol 20, 511 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00775-0download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00775-0anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 