hello nature readers, would you like to get this briefing in your inbox free every day? sign up hererelatively few studies try to understand the value of cultural heritage sites such as nachi falls, which is also a pilgrimage route in japan’s kii mountain range.credit: james fichera/gettythere are more than 50 ways to value the environment, from counting species to evaluating the cost of replacing a service provided by nature. yet assessing nature in purely monetary terms can harm people and the environment, according to the world’s largest assessment of the practice. policymaking largely disregards the multiple ways in which nature matters to people, especially indigenous people and low-income communities, says the report, written by the intergovernmental science-policy panel on biodiversity and ecosystem services (ipbes). for example, in proposals for hydroelectric dams, the needs of affected communities are often seen as secondary to those of urban consumers — especially if communities must be displaced.nature | 4 min readreference: ipbes values assessmentonly 23 people have been to the deepest known point on the planet — challenger deep, in the mariana trench near guam — since 1960. on 12 july, marine geologist dawn wright made the dive to work on the first detailed maps of some parts of the area. shortly before heading out to sea, wright spoke about why mapping the depths of the ocean matters. i wish this wasn’t such a big deal — but it is, says wright of being the first black person to take the plunge to around 11,000 metres below sea level. i want young people to see that this is possible for them, and that it’s not off limits because they are black.nature | 6 min reada us biotechnology company, verve therapeutics, says it has brought the first base-editing therapy to the clinic. last week, a person in new zealand received the gene-editing treatment to target an inherited genetic disorder that causes dangerously high cholesterol levels. and other base-editor trials are set to start soon. these therapeutics are designed to permanently change a single letter in the genetic code at a specific location without making breaks in dna, like crispr does — hopefully avoiding some types of genetic typo.the washington post | 5 min read & nature reviews drug discovery | 11 min readthe complex system created by simple starfish embryos in a dish of water has amazed physicists. for the first time, a multicellular organism has been observed naturally creating a crystalline structure — and one with unexpected properties. this is an area of physics called ‘active matter’ — and these starfish demonstrate the latest, surprising example.nature | 3 min videoreference: nature paperan invisible divide formed early last year, as covid-19 vaccines spread through rich countries while the rest of the world faced unmitigated surges of infections. at the root of the problem lies a dependence on the limited goodwill of countries — mainly in the global north — where the majority of large pharmaceutical companies are based. fifteen countries are seeing whether an open-science model can end the dangerous legacy of dependency on big pharma. the initiative, called the mrna vaccine technology transfer hub, must overcome policies that favour established manufacturers and navigate a dense web of mrna vaccine patents. this is the most complex project that i’ve ever taken on, but it’s also the most inspiring and motivating one, says petro terblanche, the managing director of afrigen, a south african firm at the core of the hub.nature | 22 min readsource: who/medicines patent pool/world bankmental-health researcher and grant-writing guru betty lai has found a way to work out which grants to apply for — and which ones just aren’t worth it. she shares her checklist to help rule out opportunities that are not a good investment of your time.nature | 6 min reada philanthropic organization has launched a venture to rescue researcher-written code that would otherwise become obsolete so that it can continue to fuel scientific discovery. the virtual institute for scientific software (viss) is a network of centres across four universities in the united states and the united kingdom, funded by former google boss eric schmidt. for example, viss resources will help to rewrite the software behind the scale aware sea ice project to better model the impact of climate change on sea ice.nature | 7 min readphysicist tony padilla is among the postgraduate researchers and supporters who have signed an open letter to the united kingdom’s largest research funder, demanding a pay rise. (nature | 6 min read)