the addition of nanoscale zeolite to na–fecx unlocks the potential of catalysts for selective olefins production in a fixed-bed reactor.you have full access to this article via your institution.in a future without utilizing crude oil resources, integrated petrochemical complexes may continue to operate using more circular drop-in petrochemical building blocks, such as synthetic olefins. olefins are indispensable for the manufacture of plastics, detergents, lubricants, etc., and may be produced from carbon monoxide (co) and hydrogen (h2) (known as ‘synthesis gas’). synthesis gas provides the platform for the production of synthetic fuels and chemicals from more sustainable, alternative carbon-containing feedstocks, including carbon dioxide (co2), waste gas streams, natural gas, municipal waste, and biomass1.the industrial process to convert synthesis gas to lower olefins, namely ethene, propene and butenes (c2-c4 olefins), is indirect and proceeds via methanol. the methanol synthesis reaction is thermodynamically limited and has a low conversion per pass, meaning recycling of reactants is needed. while the conversion of methanol to hydrocarbons does not face the same challenge, coking resulting in rapid catalyst deactivation is common2. a direct process combining the two reactions in a single fixed-bed reactor is able to overcome the thermodynamic limitation of methanol synthesis and increase catalyst lifetime3. however, conversion remains low due to incompatibility of reaction conditions for each reaction. in contrast, the fischer-tropsch to olefins (fto) technology offers a direct process and flexibility in reaction conditions to improve catalytic performance. however, the hydrocarbon product distribution is broad because the fto reaction is a surface polymerization reaction governed by the anderson-schulz-flory (asf) distribution. this statistical distribution of hydrocarbon products means the maximum selectivity towards lower olefins is around 60% with a corresponding methane selectivity of almost 30% (ref. 4). to suppress methane selectivity, a deviation from the asf distribution is needed or the higher hydrocarbons should be targeted5.writing in nature nanotechnology, wang et al. report on the use of zeolite nanosheets to promote the activity and selectivity of iron-based catalysts for the low-temperature fto reaction6. at 260 °c, 20 bar and h2/co = 1, the combination of sodium-promoted iron carbide (fecx) catalysts and mfi zeolite nanosheets resulted in more than 70% c2-c10 olefins selectivity (excluding ~50% co2 selectivity) at around 70% co conversion. while the catalytic performance of the combination increased olefins productivity 30-fold in comparison to the sole fecx catalyst, the proposed role of the zeolite nanosheets with an emphasis on the short b-axis of 90–110 nm, is more intriguing. the zeolite pores (4.7 å × 4.46 å × 4.46 å) are hypothesized to act as nanochannels to facilitate the desorption from the fecx surface and prevent the re-adsorption of olefinic products on the fecx surface (fig. 1). the short b-axis of the zeolite was further suggested to improve the diffusion of the olefins, which amplified the promoting role of the zeolite component. this is conceptually different from similar state-of-art fischer-tropsch synthesis catalytic systems, in which the acidic sites of the zeolite component catalyse oligomerization, isomerization and aromatization7,8,9,10.schematic of how the addition of nanoscale zeolite to a na-fecx catalyst improved production of α-olefins from synthesis gas. a, olefin desorption and re-adsorption on na-fecx surfaces. b, the mixing of mfi zeolite with na-fecx catalyst may facilitate the desorption of olefins from the na-fecx surface and may prevent the re-adsorption of olefins, as the mfi pores may serve as diffusion channels for the olefins to diffuse from the na-fecx surface. this led to shorter surface residence time of olefins and higher turnover of active sites. c, overview of the different length scale presented. electron microscopy images reproduced from ref. 6, springer nature limited.to demonstrate that the acidic sites of the aluminosilicate zeolite nanosheets were indeed not catalytically active, wang et al. synthesized and tested a pure silicate nanosheet material with the same mfi-type framework but without acidic sites, and similar improvement in catalytic performance was achieved. in addition, the co-feeding of α-olefins over the porous aluminosilicate alone showed high isomerization activity leading to high iso-/α-olefins ratios, but negligible oligomerization and aromatization activities. this is presumably due to the low reaction temperature and/or the presence of sodium ions in the mfi. as the porous silicate was catalytically inactive, the α-olefins formed on the fecx surface were left intact so the iso-/α-olefin ratios were low at 0.2 and α-olefins would account for around 60% of the hydrocarbon selectivity. to support their hypothesis, experimental and theoretical desorption profiles of ethene from the fecx surface were analysed and the zeolite nanosheets were most effective in decreasing the surface residence time of ethene.elemental migration is an expected phenomenon in such combination of components in a single fixed-bed11. using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy on the spent fecx and zeolite nanosheets, sodium-ion migration from fecx to zeolite nanosheets was confirmed to occur at close proximity, that is, less than 0.15 mm. surprisingly, this migration behaviour was minimized when the two components were spaced further apart, that is, more than 0.18 mm, and this was required to reveal the promoting role of the zeolite nanosheets.as is usually the case with new concepts, there are questions remaining and more experimental and theoretical studies are required to fully comprehend the observed phenomena. it is not easy to rationalize how the zeolite pores could serve as diffusion nanochannels for the olefins when the fecx catalyst and the mfi zeolite were physically mixed in granules of 0.4 to 0.81 mm, instead of being in direct contact such as core-shell catalysts10,12. if the olefins diffused 0.4 mm from the fecx surface to the mfi zeolite, is the difference in the zeolite pore length of 200 nm still significant? the alignment of the multiple length scale (fig. 1), that is, 5 å pore diameter, 90 to 100 nm pore length, >180 micron granules, required to demonstrate the promoting effect is also intricate. though there may be other possible reasons for the observed phenomena, the presented results appear to support the hypothesized role of the zeolite nanosheets. importantly, wang et al. introduced a broader concept of using a zeolite beyond its function as a catalyst or an adsorbent, and highlighted the importance of controlling multiple length scales in a reactor. this research continues the interest on strategies to improve catalytic performance by reducing the surface residence time of the products12.discussing finally the societal and economical significance, the relatively high yield of α-olefins, especially in the higher c5–c10 fraction, may be valuable. a current route to higher α-olefins is ethene oligomerization, so the direct conversion of syngas to higher α-olefins via fto could be useful. on the other hand, it is important to note that an industrial reactor is of metre scale, so the control of multiple length scales in an industrial reactor is more challenging. in any case, new developments in co2/co/h2 conversion technologies are advocated as the society moves closer to the envisioned crude oil-free future.ye, r. p. et al. nat. commun. 10, 1–10 (2019).article google scholar olsbye, u. et al. chem. soc. rev. 44, 7155–7176 (2015).cas article google scholar pan, x., jiao, f., miao, d. & bao, x. chem. rev. 121, 6588–6609 (2021).cas article google scholar torres galvis, h. m. & de jong, k. p. acs catal. 3, 2130–2149 (2013).cas article google scholar xie, j. et al. nat. commun. 10, 1–10 (2019).article google scholar wang, c. et al. nat. nanotechnol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01154-9 (2022).article google scholar wei, j. et al. nat. commun. 8, 1–8 (2017).article google scholar li, j. et al. nat. catal. 1, 787–793 (2018).cas article google scholar zhou, w. et al. chem. soc. rev. 48, 3193–3228 (2019).cas article google scholar xiao, j. et al. nat. mater. 21, (2022).weber, j. l. et al. catal. today 342, 161–166 (2020).cas article google scholar xu, y. et al. science 371, 610–613 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesgreen chemical reaction engineering, engineering and technology institute groningen, university of groningen, groningen, the netherlandsjingxiu xieyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jingxiu xie.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsxie, j. zeolite facilitates selective olefins production. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 678–679 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01164-7download citationpublished: 13 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-022-01164-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 