at the peak of the last ice age, about 20,000 years ago, vast ice sheets covered northern portions of continents in earth’s northern hemisphere, and glaciers extended from mid-latitude mountain chains in both hemispheres1. these regions were simultaneously locked into a climate marked by cold temperatures and advancing glaciers, yet earth’s orbital history suggests that summers should have been warm in the southern hemisphere and cool in the northern hemisphere1. since this conundrum emerged several decades ago, scientists have grappled with its implications, and its relationship with the origins of glacial cycles, which had varied regularly for hundreds of thousands of years. what caused synchronized bipolar ice-age cooling? and did glaciers in the tropics vary with the same rhythm as did those at higher latitudes? writing in nature, rodbell and colleagues2 show that the timing of glacial variations in the tropical andes is strikingly similar to that at higher latitudes over a period of nearly 700,000 years. read the paper: 700,000 years of tropical andean glaciationmountain glaciers are highly sensitive, purely physical monitors of climatic conditions. the worldwide retreat of mountain glaciers that has occurred over the past century or so in response to industrial-age warming is an iconic demonstration of ongoing climate change3. likewise, glaciers have sensitively monitored climate changes in the past. evidence for ancient glacier fluctuations is imprinted on the landscape and preserved in sediments. one means of reconstructing past glacier variations involves the mapping and dating of glacial landforms, such as moraine ridges, which form from the material dumped at the edge of a stabilized glacier and delineate former ice boundaries. these landforms provide direct, physical evidence of the extent of previous glaciers.however, older landforms tend to be overridden and destroyed by more recent glacier advances, leading to an incomplete archive4. rodbell and colleagues showcase another approach to reconstructing glacier activity. this involves examining accumulations of glacier-derived sediments that have been transported by meltwater and deposited in downstream lake basins. although not as direct as moraine-based reconstructions, the approach has the advantage of accessing potentially longer and more-continuous records of glacier activity than can be obtained by studying landforms.to derive a long-term record of tropical glaciation, rodbell and colleagues extracted an impressive 95-metre-long sediment core from lake junín (fig. 1), which lies between the eastern and western mountain chains of the peruvian andes. although the nearby mountains are too low to support present-day glaciers, impressive moraine structures situated upstream of lake junín mark the limits of former ice-age glaciers5.figure 1 | lake junín, located between the eastern and western mountain chains of the peruvian andes.credit: jonathan chancasana/alamythe team used extensive radiocarbon dating, uranium–thorium dating and geomagnetic measurements to establish that material in the core spans a time period of 680,000 years. among a host of analyses, the authors measured the titanium-to-calcium ratio, which reflects the proportion of the sediments that have been eroded from nearby continental rocks. they also determined the magnetic susceptibility of the sediments — a measure of how readily they can be magnetized. together, these data suggest that glacier-derived sediment found its way into the lake basin. this interpretation is bolstered by the fact that an increase in the flux of glacial sediment, as estimated by rodbell and colleagues, coincided with the time of construction of moraine ridges in the lake junín catchment (see, for example, ref. 5).the 680,000-year record of lake junín sedimentation shows a striking correspondence to the rhythm of high-latitude glacial cycles inferred from sediment records obtained in deep-sea investigations. increases in the amount of glacial sediment delivered to the lake coincided with ice-age expansions of the large northern hemisphere ice sheets. furthermore, glacial periods for junín correspond to cold intervals registered in antarctic ice cores — although it should be noted that the antarctic temperature reconstruction was used to help build the timeline of the junín record. these observations suggest that the rhythm of ice ages for most of the past million years encompassed the entire globe (fig. 2).figure 2 | glacial periods in the tropical andes correspond to global ice-age climate cycles. earth’s northern and southern hemispheres are both known to have experienced oscillations in glacial periods in the past, but it remains unclear whether tropical glaciers also underwent such changes. rodbell et al.2 used glacier-derived sediment from lake junín in the peruvian andes to reconstruct a 680,000-year record of glacial variation in the region. a, the authors compared their results with proxy measurements of global ice volume from another study12. b, from their measurements of the material properties of the sediment, rodbell et al. computed a proxy for the extent of ice loss in the lake junín region. c, the authors also compared their findings with proxy temperature measurements inferred from cores drilled from antarctic ice13. together, the results suggest that tropical regions have undergone the same climactic variations as those attributed to the polar regions. (adapted from figs 3 and 4 of ref. 2.)rodbell and colleagues2 attribute the general similarities between high- and low-latitude glacier expansions to a combination of factors related to the growth of the large northern ice sheets and the global impacts of reduced greenhouse-gas concentrations. they suggest that certain characteristics of the lake junín record arose from expansions of large northern ice sheets that were related to the redistribution of sunlight on earth’s surface, driven by slow variations in the tilt and wobble of earth’s axis. the authors also point to climate-induced changes in precipitation patterns to explain differences between signatures of tropical andean glaciers and northern hemisphere ice volume, and to account for millennial-scale fluctuations in the lake junín record. the aberrant global synchrony of present-day warminghowever, mysteries remain with regard to the global picture. for example, tropical andean glaciers seem to have achieved and then sustained their maximal extent before the ice sheets hit their maximum volumes during the most recent glacial cycle2,5–7 — and in the case of glaciers in the lake junín catchment, perhaps earlier cycles as well. this also seems to be true of mid-latitude mountain glaciers in both hemispheres (see, for example, refs 8, 9). tropical and mid-latitude glacier systems also receded rapidly at the end of the last ice age — outpacing the demise of the ice sheets and the rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide to concentrations expected in an interglacial period (see, for example, refs 7–10).perhaps local factors account for this. but another possibility is that a third factor was involved in driving temperature changes of similar timing and severity around the planet, influencing both large ice sheets and small mountain glaciers. the polar regions have conventionally been emphasized as drivers and pacemakers of ice-age climate variability. however, the tropics include the indo-pacific warm pool, earth’s ‘heat engine’, which can produce rapid global temperature shifts8,11. the tropics might also be sensitive to changes in earth’s orbit and climate dynamics occurring at higher latitudes8,11. given the correspondence between signatures of tropical glacial periods and higher-latitude ice-age climate changes, it is perhaps worth considering the role of the tropical regions themselves in facilitating a nearly synchronous rhythm of global ice ages8.it is clear from rodbell and colleagues’ innovative record that any hypothesis to explain what drove ice-age climate cycles must account for the near-simultaneity of glacial periods in the tropical andes, and glacier and climate changes at higher latitudes in both polar hemispheres. the authors have demonstrated an exciting strategy for approaching this problem through detailed sediment-based reconstructions of glacier melt paired with precise moraine chronologies.