biomolecular condensates form and dissolve in response to a wide range of signals. a new study reports a solubility-based phosphoproteome-profiling approach, which uncovers the extensive role of phosphorylation in regulating protein partitioning into condensates across the human proteome.you have full access to this article via your institution.condensates are reversible, microscopic, membrane-less assemblies of biomolecules. they are critical for the control of diverse biological processes and are exquisitely sensitive to environmental conditions. many condensates are enriched in rna and rna-binding proteins. condensate function and stability are tightly regulated by the concentrations of constituents and the strength of interactions between them (reviewed in ref. 1). specific biomolecules can be concentrated (partitioned) in condensates or can be excluded (departitioned). these processes are often mediated by dynamic multivalent interactions between regions that lack a stable secondary structure, called intrinsically disordered regions.chemical modifications of amino acids, termed post-translational modifications (ptms), within the disordered protein regions modify the strength and selectivity of these interactions, causing the protein to partition in, or departition from, the condensate (fig. 1a). an atlas of ptms that modify rna-binding proteins was recently reported2. as expected for proteins that tend to reside in condensates, rna-binding proteins were modified to a greater extent than the rest of the proteome, with phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation and methylation accounting for over half of these ptms. indeed, the assembly and disassembly of the stress-dependent cytoplasmic condensates — stress granules — are heavily regulated via sumoylation and ubiquitination3,4. however, determining which ptms serve as switches for protein partitioning in and out of condensates remains challenging.a, phosphorylation (blue circles) tunes the partitioning of proteins inside condensates. ptms on the red and gold proteins promote decreased and increased partitioning, respectively. b, schematic representation of the solubility profiling approach and potential applications.in this issue of nature chemical biology, sridharan et al.5 report an elegant proteomic approach to profile the condensate-association and phosphorylation-controlled switches of over 5,000 proteins in hela cells (fig. 1b). they performed cell lysis using two stringencies: (i) strong denaturing conditions that retain all proteins and (ii) mild denaturing conditions that retain all proteins not associated with condensates. differences between these two fractions revealed the nature and composition of the condensate-associated proteome. the same proteomic analysis carried out after rna digestion also identified proteins whose partitioning into condensates depends on interactions with rna, further reinforcing the notion that rna–protein interactions are central to condensate formation and composition. the authors found that features typically associated with proteins that undergo condensation (such as higher expression, disorder or lower hydrophobicity) were enriched in the condensate fraction.phosphoproteomic analysis of these samples identified fractions with preferential accumulation of phosphorylated sites, suggesting that this particular ptm regulates condensate formation by either favoring or disfavoring partitioning. for example, npm1 is known to partition into the nucleolus to aid in ribosome biogenesis, but it is easily ejected in response to stress signals and during mitosis. its nucleolar partitioning is mediated by interactions with nucleolar proteins and nucleic acids, mostly driven by electrostatic contacts6. sridharan et al.5 identified ptms that departition npm1 from the nucleolus. interestingly, the ptms that exert the greatest effect on partitioning are located in regions that control condensation via self–self interactions (ser106 and ser218/thr219) and via interactions with rna (ser218/thr219, ser254 and ser260)6. they also found that the splicing factor hnrnpa1 was phosphorylated at multiple sites within its positively charged disordered c terminus, which promoted departitioning from nuclear condensates. the change in the electrostatic balance introduced by phosphorylation likely weakens condensation mediated by interactions between hnrnpa1 and rna.the dataset generated by sridharan et al.5 provides valuable insights into the mechanisms that control condensate homeostasis in hela cells. the same methodology can be applied to other ptms, cells and tissue types; thus, follow-up studies could elucidate the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways that control condensate assembly and disassembly across the spectrum of normal and pathological cell states. an in-depth understanding of the ptms and enzymes that govern condensate partitioning will facilitate the discovery of condensate modulators. some drugs may act directly on condensates by interrupting the interactions or processes therein; others may act indirectly by inhibiting enzymes that catalyze ptms of components, consequently altering the condensate assembly or composition.whether a protein resides in a condensate depends on its environment, level of expression and ptms. furthermore, these parameters will vary between tissue types and disease states. proteins are typically expressed in the cellular environment at levels close to their solubility limits, and those containing low-complexity regions are particularly vulnerable to age-dependent aggregation7. future work based on the methodology developed by sridharan et al.5 will contribute to expanding our understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying aging and diseases driven by condensate dysregulation, as well as drug–condensate interactions.snead, w. t. & gladfelter, a. s. mol. cell 76, 295–305 (2019).cas article google scholar england, w. e. et al. nucleic acids res. 50, 4329–4339 (2022).cas article google scholar marmor-kollet, h. et al. mol. cell 80, 876–891.e6 (2020).cas article google scholar gwon, y. et al. science 372, eabf6548 (2021).cas article google scholar sridharan, s. et al. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01062-y (2022).article google scholar mitrea, d. m. et al. nat. commun. 9, 842 (2018).article google scholar vecchi, g. et al. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 117, 1015–1020 (2020).cas article google scholar download referencesdewpoint therapeutics, boston, ma, usakamran rizzolo & diana m. mitreayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to diana m. mitrea.the authors are full-time employees at dewpoint therapeutics, a biotechnology company leading condensate drug discovery and development. the authors declare that this affiliation has not compromised the perspective provided here.reprints and permissionsrizzolo, k., mitrea, d.m. flipping the switch. nat chem biol (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01075-7download citationpublished: 21 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01075-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 