conflicting results in measurements of the global spectrum of the hydrogen 21-cm line may indicate that there are large systematic errors. a different experimental approach to reach the redshifted signal from cosmic dawn assesses possible systematic errors together with the signal.you have full access to this article via your institution.the first stars and galaxies formed about a hundred million years after the big bang, or so the standard cosmological model predicts. observing these earliest stars and galaxies are listed as the top goals of the largest, most advanced and expensive telescopes, such as the recently launched james webb space telescope (jwst), the current generation of ground-based optical telescopes under construction — including the extremely large telescope (elt), the thirty meter telescope (tmt), the giant magellan telescope (gmt), and the upcoming square kilometer array (ska). yet some radio astronomers are attempting to peek into the era when the first stars and galaxies formed or even prior to that — periods known as ‘cosmic dawn’ and ‘dark ages’, respectively — by using a deceptively simple device: a small antenna. in nature astronomy, eloy de lera acedo and co-workers present the radio experiment for the analysis of cosmic hydrogen (reach) experiment1, a potentially ground-breaking experimental effort in this direction.a hydrogen atom emits a photon of 21 cm wavelength when its electron spin flips from parallel to anti-parallel with respect to the proton spin, and absorbs such a photon from the cosmic microwave background (cmb) by the reverse process. the occupation fraction of the parallel and anti-parallel spin states are described by the spin temperature, and the net amount of emission or absorption is determined by whether the spin temperature is higher (emission) or lower (absorption) than the cmb temperature at the time. when the first stars formed, they produced a large number of ultraviolet photons, which scatter through the gas, driving the spin temperature towards the gas kinetic temperature by means of the wouthuysen–field mechanism. at this point the gas kinetic temperature is lower than that of the cmb so an absorption feature is produced. later on, after the gas is heated up by x-rays from the first stars, galaxies and quasars, the absorption is then turned into emission. the 21-cm global spectrum encodes this history of the early universe2,3 (fig. 1). in a typical model for the dark ages or cosmic dawn, the peak absorption is of the order of 100 mk and may occur at redshift of around 20. as the signal is produced in every direction of the sky, it should be possible to detect the signal with a single small antenna, which has a broad beam, and output an average spectrum of the whole sky.model of the 21-cm global spectrum. the main cosmic events are labelled, from the dark ages to the end of reionization, including their signatures from left to right: collisional coupling (grey), onset of ly-α coupling (yellow), onset of x-ray heating (orange), photo-ionization (purple). the reach band, range 50–170 mhz (redshift z ∼ 7.5–28), is shown in blue. figure adapted from ref. 1, springer nature ltd.detecting this 21-cm global spectrum is a great challenge, because our own galaxy produces a foreground radiation that is brighter than the signal sought by more than four orders of magnitude. in principle the 21-cm signal could be extracted from the galactic foreground, which has a smooth spectrum, but this requires very high precision and dynamic range in the global spectrum measurement. in an actual experiment, the response of the antenna and receiver are not perfectly smooth. at the interface between the antenna and receiver an imperfect match of impedance produces reflections and standing waves that generate ripples in the spectrum. the antenna beam pattern may be chromatic — that is, varying with frequency — which then convolves with the anisotropy of the sky and produces modulation in the spectrum. with the strong foreground, any of these imperfections may produce features in the spectrum, which can dominate over the tiny 21-cm signal.experimentalists have endeavoured to design instruments for the precision measurement of the global spectrum despite these difficulties. antennas are designed to have minimum chromaticity, and the impedance of the antenna is carefully measured and compensated in the data analysis. in 2018, the edges experiment resulted in a claim of a detection of a strong absorption signal peaked at 78 mhz, corresponding to a redshift of 17.2. the absorption feature has a depth of 550 mk, which is much stronger than expected in the standard cosmological model4. if this result is confirmed it would be a great discovery. a number of interesting physics or astrophysics mechanisms have been proposed to explain this unexpected result, for example the exotic dark matter model5, or a low-frequency cosmic radio background in the early universe in addition to the cmb6,7. however, there are doubts about the edges result, and more recently the saras collaboration has announced that their data are inconsistent with it8. ground reflection and ionosphere refraction may also affect the measurement, and it is not known how large each of the systematic errors in these measurements may be.the reach experiment1 has been designed to detect the systematics together with the signal by applying bayesian statistics to the data. some systematics such as the beam chromaticity are modelled in the pipeline, and the authors also developed a mathematical technique called ‘maximally smooth functions’ to help identify those unaccounted systematics. to provide the information needed by this approach, reach uses two different types of antenna simultaneously, makes in-field measurements for receiver calibration, and observes in an ultra-wide band. hopefully, the presence of systematic errors and quantitative estimates of their sizes will be reported together in the near future.eventually, we would hope to reduce the systematics as much as possible. the effect of ionosphere and ground reflection could be avoided in measurements taken from the lunar orbit, and a number of experiments have been proposed, including dapper9 by the us, dsl by china10, and pratush by india. with a single antenna we may still learn the history of the cosmic dawn.de lera acedo, e. et al. nat. astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01709-9 (2022).article google scholar chen, x. & miralda-escude, j. astrophys. j. 602, 1–11 (2004).ads article google scholar chen, x. & miralda-escude, j. astrophys. j. 684, 18–33 (2008).ads article google scholar bowman, j. d., rogers, a. e. e., monsalve, r. a., mozdzen, t. j. & mahesh, n. nature 555, 67–70 (2018).ads article google scholar barkana, r. nature 555, 71–74 (2018).ads article google scholar feng, c. & holder, g. astrophys. j. 858, 17 (2018).article google scholar ewall-wice, a. et al. astrophys. j. 868, 63 (2018).ads article google scholar singh, s. et al. nat. astron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01610-5 (2022).article google scholar burns, j. o. phil. trans. roy. soc. a 379, 2019.0564 (2020).article google scholar chen, x. et al. phil. trans. roy. soc. a 379, 2019.0566 (2020).article google scholar download referencesnational astronomical observatories, chinese academy of sciences, beijing, chinaxuelei chenyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to xuelei chen.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionschen, x. from a small antenna to cosmic dawn. nat astron 6, 887–888 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01724-wdownload citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01724-wanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 