the impact of endogenous retrovirus silencing during mammalian development is poorly understood. a new study shows that their abnormal reactivation in pluripotent cells dismantles key gene regulatory networks by perturbing transcriptional condensates linked to super-enhancer function.you have full access to this article via your institution.a surprise of the genome sequence era has been that much of mammalian genomes is densely populated by transposable elements (tes), many with strong enhancer/promoter activity1. however, instead of actively removing te dna from the genome, some organisms can adopt a different approach: post-transcriptional silencing of tes through piwi-interacting rnas (pirnas) and small interfering rnas (sirnas)2,3 or transcriptional silencing of tes by chromatin-based means such as dna methylation4, the hush complex5 or the krab-znf–trim28–setdb1–histone h3 lys9 trimethylation (h3k9me3) pathway6,7. chromatin silencing effectively camouflages tes from the transcriptional machinery, allowing, in effect, a cease-fire.this ‘blacklisting’ of tes through chromatin silencing can be compared to someone who holds box seat tickets to the theater: in a hurry to sit down before the curtain rises, they will never waste time looking for their seat in the orchestra level even though those seats far outnumber the box seating capacity. similarly, the molecular strategy of chromatin silencing for tes effectively decreases the search space of the genome and allows transcriptional regulation of the vip cellular genes in the box seats to be targeted and efficient, despite their being embedded in a crowd of tes.however, having genes coexist with tes is perilous because when heterochromatin silencing is removed, the tes are no longer effectively camouflaged from transcription factors and the rna polymerase machinery. earlier work on embryos and embryonic stem (es) cells deficient in trim28 or setdb1 (a transcriptional co-repressor and h3k9 methyltransferase, respectively) showed that once given the opportunity for reactivation, endogenous retroviruses (ervs) silenced by this pathway are upregulated so strongly that it destroys pluripotency in es cells and can be lethal in embryos6,7.despite this striking phenotype, a major unanswered question in erv research was what the molecular mechanism might be through which heterochromatin depression and erv reactivation lead to loss of pluripotency and death. because some line-1 and ervs retain the capacity for retrotransposition, it was thought that perhaps reactivation results in double-stranded dna breaks and damage during integration, similar to what occurs during loss of dna methylation/pirna machinery in germ cells3. however, in contrast to that expectation, the work from asimi et al.8 in this issue of nature genetics shows that, remarkably, chromatin derepression of ervs leads to ‘hijacking’ of transcriptional condensates that antagonizes the pluripotency circuitry. this finding represents a key mechanistic insight into the effects of te reactivation that could reorient the field.the authors used mouse es cells in which trim28 was tagged with a degron, allowing its rapid depletion by 6 hours after treatment. after removal of trim28, ervs lose h3k9me3, and both ervs and some cellular genes affected by erv enhancers are markedly upregulated. importantly, genes regulated by super-enhancers (se), which are known to be exquisitely sensitive to perturbation9, are quickly downregulated after loss of trim28.the authors propose that the decommissioning effect on pluripotency ses occurs through competition or titration of rna polymerase machinery from these ses to ervs. in support of this model, over-expression of the oskm (oct4, sox2, klf4, myc) factors can partially rescue the loss of trim28, suggesting that further saturating ses with the oskm factors can counteract the titration of mediator and rna polymerase away from these ses. because rna at local sites (neighboring long intergenic noncoding rnas or enhancer rnas) can promote the formation of transcriptional condensates through interactions with intrinsically disordered regions (such as med1 or the rna polymerase ii c-terminal domain)10, the authors tested whether erv rna is important for the disruption of ses. indeed, short hairpin rna (shrna) knockdown of erv rna led to a partial rescue of se-gene downregulation after trim28 depletion, indicating that the rna polymerase machinery might be titrated away from ses and further stabilized at erv loci by transcripts generated in cis. studies in vitro confirmed that intrinsically disordered regions can be induced to form droplets by addition of erv rna, although the authors note that other rna molecules also exhibit this property.next, the authors asked whether any strong transcriptional interference can disrupt se. surprisingly, control transgene induction only weakly perturbed se-controlled transcripts, whereas induction of iapez erv transgenes strongly downregulated se targets. these data suggest that tf binding sites in ervs are not responsible by themselves for the titration of transcriptional machinery away from se; rather, the erv rna produced contributes to this effect. in support of this model, the authors find that erv rna is preferentially retained in the nucleus compared to the mrna from a control transgene. lastly, the authors confirm that the effect of trim28 depletion is not specific to mouse es cells, but that mouse embryos deficient in trim28 have high erv expression and few epiblast cells, and instead contain an abnormal abundance of extraembryonic lineages such as parietal endoderm.several important implications of this work will need additional study. first, the balance between how much of the molecular effect is contributed by te-binding-site titration of transcriptional condensates versus te-rna-mediated disruption of condensates should be explored. several recent preprints indicate that tes can act as a sink or a siphon to globally interfere with transcription of cellular genes11,12. indeed, o’hara et al.12 postulate that transient, developmentally regulated erv derepression (for example, in preimplantation development or germ cells) may actually serve as a regulatory property promoting transitions in cellular states. for instance, mouse mervl and human hervk are strongly reactivated by dux and oct4, respectively, during preimplantation, when heterochromatin levels are low13,14. perhaps these erv ‘sinks’ provide a regulatory functionality affecting the behavior of cellular gene networks.second, the cell type specificity whereby trim28 depletion selectively affects pluripotent cells in the embryo is intriguing. extraembryonic cell types seem to be less severely affected by the loss of trim28, but what is the mechanism? are erv-activating tfs present only in the epiblast? the results from asimi et al.8 show that iapez (but not mmetn or mmervk9c) ervs are also strongly activated in extraembryonic cells in trim28 knockout embryos. if extraembryonic cells are indeed less affected by trim28 depletion, does this mean that non-pluripotent cells are less reliant on se, or more resilient to se perturbation? if so, is antagonism between ervs and pluripotency a way to protect the embryo proper (and later germ cells) from cells that have higher erv reactivation or colonization?finally, although this work from asimi et al.8 is solidly focused on early embryos, it has far-reaching implications outside developmental biology, as global te reactivation appears to mediate some therapeutic strategies in cancer treatment15. apart from stimulation of innate immunity through te double-stranded rnas and adaptive immune stimulation through the production of te-derived neoantigens, does chromatin derepression of tes also result in highjacking of transcriptional condensates that interfere with se operating in cancer cells, potentially contributing to the therapeutic effectiveness of these treatments?in summary, the work from asimi et al.8 shows that, given the right circumstances, tes can be given a ticket upgrade from orchestra level to box seats — even though they are hecklers at the pluripotency symphony (fig. 1).after loss of trim28, global reorganization of transcriptional condensates to ervs results in erv activation and collapse of the pluripotency circuitry. pol ii, rna polymerase ii.fueyo, r., judd, j., feschotte, c. & wysocka, j. nat. rev. mol. cell biol. 1–17 (2022).aravin, a. a., hannon, g. j. & brennecke, j. science 318, 761–764.houwing, s. et al. cell 129, 69–82 (2007).cas article google scholar parry, a., rulands, s. & reik, w. nat. rev. genet. 22, 59–66 (2021).cas article google scholar liu, n. et al. nature 553, 228–232 (2018).cas article google scholar matsui, t. et al. nature 464, 927–931 (2010).cas article google scholar rowe, h. m. et al. nature 463, 237–240 (2010).cas article google scholar asimi, v. et al. nat. genet. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01132-w (2022).article pubmed google scholar whyte, w. a. et al. cell 153, 307–319 (2013).cas article google scholar hnisz, d., shrinivas, k., young, r. a., chakraborty, a. k. & sharp, p. a. cell 169, 13–23 (2017).cas article google scholar meng, f. w., murphy, k. e., makowski, c. e. & murphy, p. j. preprint at biorxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.03.31.486614 (2022).o’hara, r. & banaszynski, l. a. preprint at biorxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.04.28.489907 (2022).hendrickson, p. g. et al. nat. genet. 49, 925–934 (2017).cas article google scholar grow, e. j. et al. nature 522, 221–225 (2015).cas article google scholar chiappinelli, k. b. et al. cell 162, 974–986 (2015).cas article google scholar download referencese.j.g. is supported by a cancer prevention & research institute of texas recruitment of first-time, tenure-track faculty member award grant rr210077 and by the cecil h. and ida green center for reproductive biology sciences. apologies to my colleagues whose work cannot be cited owing to space constraints.cecil h. and ida green center for reproductive biology sciences and the division of basic research, department of obstetrics and gynecology, university of texas southwestern medical center, dallas, tx, usaedward j. growyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to edward j. grow.reprints and permissionsgrow, e.j. endogenous retroviruses steer transcriptional condensates away from pluripotency. nat genet 54, 1068–1069 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01111-1download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-022-01111-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 