advancing wheat sowing dates has a large benefit to crop yields in the eastern ganges plain of india. the contribution of better crop calendar management to yield gains should be studied more extensively around the world, especially in underperforming regions.you have full access to this article via your institution.currently, increasing crop yield relies mostly on intensive management practices such as increasing the use of fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation water. but this approach is costly for un- or under-developed regions, which tend to have low crop productivities or large yield gaps as compared with high-yield regions. it also takes a toll on the environment, as the agrichemicals used can emit greenhouse gases, pollute water systems and deteriorate air quality1. evidence is growing that the efficacy of these intensive practices to further enhance crop yields will probably be limited by the changing climate system2. therefore, developing low-cost and sustainable strategies to increase crop yield and the climate resilience of crop systems deserves urgent attention, especially in under-developed regions.in this issue of nature food, mcdonald et al3. report that advancing wheat sowing dates, a seemingly simple change, has a large benefit to crop yields in the eastern ganges plain of india. they estimate that untapped wheat yield potential can increase 69% by advancing the wheat sowing date to early november instead of late december. this considerable contribution of sowing date change supersedes the influence of all other management practices or factors such as fertilizer use, irrigation, weed management and crop duration. as climate change intensifies, their results further underscore the increasing importance of precise sowing-time management because the cool winter period is expected to become shorter, which shrinks the favourable thermal window for dry-season wheat in south asia. although the importance of timely planting has been suggested before, mcdonald et al. are able to quantitatively assess the contribution of sowing date patterns by leveraging machine learning and dynamic crop simulation based on field and household surveys and remote sensing time series information. the wealth of data has also enabled the authors to determine what factors would affect the capacity of farmers to change sowing dates.the other major finding of their study is that timely planting of wheat also depends on adjustments to rice systems. in the studied region, wheat is often planted in rotation with rice, and management of these co-cropped systems involves complicated decision-making that may lead to production or environmental tradeoffs. mcdonald et al3. analyse feasible calendar management strategies to increase wheat yield without sacrificing rice production. their scenario analysis suggests that when interventions are made in the coupled rice–wheat calendar, gains from wheat yield productivity and farmers’ profitability are much higher than when interventions are made in the calendar of the rice or wheat systems alone. in addition, mcdonald et al. show that rice calendar change to ensure timely wheat sowing, when managed properly, does not necessarily induce tradeoffs of rice yield and profitability losses.the study has important implications for india’s food security. wheat provides ~20% of food energy and ~17% of dietary protein in india4, but increasing wheat production to meet the projected food demand may be challenging. this is partly because india’s major wheat-producing regions, such as the western indo-gangetic plain, have already achieved high yields (4.5 t ha−1), leaving them with limited room for further yield growth. furthermore, increasing resource constraints, such as groundwater depletion, in these regions makes the potential yield growth even more challenging. for these reasons, policymakers in india have turned to the country’s underperforming regions, such as the eastern ganges plain, with average wheat yields at ~1.0 t ha−1, for growth opportunities. results from mcdonald et al. show that their proposed cropping calendar changes to the wheat–rice system could turn the eastern ganges plain from a net importer to a net exporter of wheat, thus contributing substantially to domestic and regional food security.the study by mcdonald et al. also has important implications for global food security and agricultural sustainability (fig. 1). globally, yield gaps occur disproportionately in un- or under-developed countries or regions5, where agriculture is dominated by smallholder farmers with poor agronomic knowledge and limited access to advanced management information and technologies. the research serves as a timely warning about how the current late sowing dates may have weakened wheat yield and the climate resilience of wheat systems in eastern india6 by causing crops to experience more heat stress during the growing season. other regions around the world with similar situations to eastern india may also be subjected to the ‘yield curse’ of late or improper sowing dates. timely sowing is an especially important issue as climate change intensifies and adds to the complexity of agricultural management. what used to work may not be as effective now and in the future. thus, the influence of planting time on yields and the contribution of better time management to yield gains should be studied more extensively around the world, taking into account local climate changes. it should also be noted that calendar management conserves resources and induces few environmental burdens as compared with intensive practices like fertilization.better crop calendar management can contribute to food security, farmers’ profitability and agricultural sustainability under a changing climate.furthermore, the study by mcdonald et al. reinforces the critical importance of integrated or systems management that considers all the cropping systems in one field and their complicated tradeoffs. rotations, intercropping or multi-cropping are common practices in smallholder farms around the world, as they can generate more income than monocultures. as mcdonald et al. have shown, managing interlinked cropping systems together has a better chance at maximizing yield gains and minimizing or even eliminating potential tradeoffs among economic profitability and environmental sustainability. ‘collective and collaborative’ adjustments and adaptations between multiple crop systems could amplify agronomic and environmental synergies and increase the overall climate resilience of the systems being managed.the work conducted by mcdonald et al. adds to the growing body of studies seeking to identify strategies in the agri-food system — such as crop species diversification7,8, coupled livestock and crop systems9, and rice–fish co-cultures10 — that create substantial synergies among food security, environmental sustainability, economic profitability and climate resilience. collectively, these studies point to an increasingly clear path towards global agricultural and environmental sustainability under a changing climate.d’odorico, p. et al. rev. geophys. 56, 456–531 (2018).ads article google scholar ma, c.-s. et al. nat. commun. 12, 5351 (2021).ads cas article google scholar mcdonald, a. j. et al. nat. food https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00549-0 (2022).article google scholar chatrath, r., mishra, b., ferrara, g. o., singh, s. k. & joshi, a. k. euphytica 157, 447–456 (2007).article google scholar mueller, n. d. et al. nature 490, 254–257 (2012).ads cas article google scholar park, a. g., davis, a. s. & mcdonald, a. j. glob. food sec. 17, 1–8 (2018).article google scholar liu, b. b. et al. nat. food 2, 570–577 (2021).article google scholar renard, d. & tilman, d. nature 571, 257–260 (2019).ads cas article google scholar bai, z. h. et al. nat. food 3, 152–160 (2022).cas article google scholar guo, l. et al. elife https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.73869 (2022).download referencesstate key laboratory of pollution control & resource reuse school of environment, nanjing university, nanjing, p. r. chinabeibei liuthe johns hopkins university-nanjing university center for chinese and american studies, nanjing, p. r. chinabeibei liukey laboratory of the three gorges reservoir region’s eco-environment, ministry of education, chongqing university, chongqing, p. r. chinayi yangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to beibei liu or yi yang.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsliu, b., yang, y. large benefits of timely planting. nat food 3, 495–496 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00553-4download citationpublished: 21 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00553-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 