companies pursue souped-up il-2 candidates, undeterred by nektar’s setback.you have full access to this article via your institution.hopes to harness the therapeutic potential of interleukin-2 (il-2) have been buoyed by reports of engineered cytokines showing promising signs of antitumor activity in patients, even when administered as single-agent therapies. these incipient successes — with drugs such as alkermes’ nemvaleukin alfa and cue biopharma’s cue-101, as reported at last month’s annual meeting of the american society of clinical oncology (asco) — provided a counterbalance to april’s news that nektar therapeutics had halted development of its pegylated version of il-2, known as bempegaldesleukin and once the focus of a record-setting, multibillion-dollar licensing agreement. nektar and its partner bristol myers squibb jointly ended bempegaldesleukin development when it failed to offer any added benefit to checkpoint blockade therapy in several late-stage trials.undeterred by bempegaldesleukin’s demise, the industry is forging ahead with a diverse pipeline of designer il-2–based agents — more than a dozen of which are now in the clinic — as developers hope to overcome the challenges that have kept the cytokine from its immuno-oncology promise (table 1). many companies are eyeing applications in autoimmunity, too. there are a lot of good strategies that are out there, says marc ernstoff, chief of the immunooncology branch at the us national cancer institute. each of the engineered il-2–like drugs is unique — and i think each will have to be tested.a recombinant form of il-2 known as proleukin (aldesleukin) was, in many ways, the original cancer immunotherapeutic. approved in the 1990s for treating advanced kidney cancer and metastatic melanoma, this human il-2 analog proved highly effective for some individuals. but few patients could tolerate the high doses required to induce antitumor effects. and, in an age of checkpoint inhibitors, sales of the cytokine therapy have slowed to a trickle.the need for high doses arises from a quirk of il-2 biology: it has different activities depending on the concentration. at low doses, the cytokine preferentially binds a trimeric il-2 receptor (comprising an α-, a β- and a γ-chain) on regulatory t (treg) cells, whereas at high doses, il-2 will also engage lower-affinity dimers — made of only β- and γ-chains and found on cd8+ effector t cells and natural killer cells — to boost anticancer immunity and thereby overcome the immunosuppressive effects of activated treg cells. unfortunately, because trimeric il-2 receptors also exist on endothelial cells in the lungs, vasculature and elsewhere, toxicities such as potentially fatal vascular leak syndrome may result when proleukin is given at therapeutically relevant amounts.nektar’s bempegaldesleukin was supposed to address these problems. its releasable polyethylene glycol (peg) groups were designed to extend the cytokine’s half-life and to stop it from binding trimeric receptors. but as the peg molecules came off and the drug became active, the receptor bias towards βγ receptors on t cells was likely lost, says fahar merchant, president and ceo of medicenna therapeutics in toronto, resulting in a slow-release version of proleukin with little to no receptor selectivity. bempeg was not optimally designed, he says. there are better ways of designing an il-2 molecule.medicenna, like several other companies, is developing il-2 ‘muteins’ — versions of the cytokine with altered amino acid sequences that change how the molecule interacts with its receptor. because they avoid α-chain binding, these cytokines are known as not-α therapies. some of these il-2 variants are administered as standalone cytokine therapies, often with peg molecules attached for improved pharmacokinetics or to support receptor bias. others — including medicenna’s mdna11, anaveon’s anv419 and roche’s rg6279 — are formulated as protein fusions to enhance receptor-subunit selectivity, promote cell targeting or extend drug half-life.sanofi, for example, has sar444245, acquired through a $2.5 billion takeover of synthorx in early 2020. that il-2 candidate, currently in phase 2 testing, includes a non-cleavable peg group attached to an unnatural amino acid and positioned to block α-chain binding while leaving βγ-chain binding unperturbed. yet the most advanced clinical candidate, now that bempegaldesleukin is out of the picture, is nemvaleukin alfa, alkermes’ fusion protein. it pairs a circularly permuted form of il-2 with a fragment of the α-chain it would normally bind. with that domain tacked on, the construct no longer interacts with endogenous α-chains found in trimeric receptor complexes in the body and, as alkermes scientists have shown, is selective for dimeric receptors instead.at the asco meeting, researchers reported clinical data from>200 early trial participants demonstrating that the majority of individuals who received nemvaleukin alfa, either alone or in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor, experienced tumor shrinkage or stable disease. a phase 3 trial in patients with ovarian, fallopian tube and peritoneal cancers kicked off earlier this year.although not-α therapies may help improve receptor specificity, daina graybosch, an analyst at svb securities, sees a critical weakness in these il-2 drug candidates: they sort of just nonspecifically expand all lymphocytes, in the periphery and in the tumor, she says. there’s no selectivity for the type of t cells that you want to expand — namely, those in the tumor microenvironment. that’s why she favors a growing suite of technologies that target the cytokine to cancer-reactive t cells.cue biopharma’s fusion protein platform offers one such example. it combines a human leukocyte antigen complex, a tumor-associated peptide epitope, a pair of reduced-affinity il-2 molecules and an inactivated human immunoglobulin g1 constant region (igg1 fc) domain. the construct engages with antigen-specific t-cell receptors for precision delivery of its il-2 payload to anti-cancer immune cells. this selective targeting of il-2 to the tumor-specific t cell repertoire could allow us to exploit the maximal potential of this key cytokine for cancer immunotherapy, says cue president and cso anish suri.the company’s lead product, cue-101, uses a peptide epitope derived from a human papillomavirus-16 protein to go after virus-positive head and neck cancers. clinicians reported encouraging early signs of antitumor activity at the asco meeting in june, with tolerable dosing at levels nearly 1,000 times higher than the amounts approved for proleukin. a first-in-human trial of cue-102, which is nearly identical to the company’s other therapeutic candidate but swaps out the viral peptide for one from the wilms tumor 1 protein, is currently enrolling.another way of directing il-2 to tumor-reactive t cells involves cytokine–antibody fusions. at roche, scientists have combined an il-2 mutein, engineered to abolished α-chain binding, with various monoclonal antibodies (mabs) designed to increase concentrations of the cytokine in the tumor microenvironment. two such therapeutic candidates directed against tumor-associated antigens were abandoned after phase 1 testing in the mid-2010s. the company’s third go-around centers on rg6279, which pairs roche’s modified cytokine with a mab that binds the programmed cell death protein 1 (pd-1). by targeting the therapy to two points on tumor-reactive t cells, the company hopes to strengthen il-2’s ability to stimulate these cells while simultaneously blocking the checkpoint pathway in the process. a case report unveiled at an asco-adjacent investor event hinted at the drug’s potential to shrink tumors in patients with refractory disease.‘masking’ offers yet another option. by tethering an extra protein domain to an il-2 mutein via a cleavable linker, companies hope to restrict the cytokine’s activity to cancer sites, where specialized enzymes found in the tumor microenvironment can chop off the fused domain and reactivate the therapy. werewolf therapeutics and xilio therapeutics are pursuing this masked il-2 approach, while synthekine, a startup founded by structural biologist k. christopher garcia of the stanford university school of medicine, is taking advantage of sophisticated cytokine engineering to design muteins that selectively agonize trimeric il-2 receptors found only on antigen-activated t cells.even minute differences in the binding parameters will lead to activation of different subsets of immune cells that will influence both efficacy and toxicity, says garcia, who also helped originate the il-2 mutein and cytokine mimic technologies now being trialed by medicenna and neoleukin therapeutics.synthekine’s lead candidate, stk-012, is being studied as a monotherapy and in combination with a pd-1 inhibitor. but the company has another il-2 agent in preclinical development that is designed to serve as a dedicated ligand for selective activation of adoptive cell therapies. late last year, synthekine’s chief development officer martin oft and his colleagues demonstrated the ability of this orthogonal il-2 receptor–ligand system to enhance the antitumor efficacy of anti-cd19 chimeric antigen receptor (car) t cells in a mouse model of lymphoma. separately, a team co-led by garcia and immunopathologist michael milone of the university of pennsylvania perelman school of medicine reported similar findings.synthekine expects to begin trials of this technology within the year, and other companies — including asher biotherapeutics, developer of a cd8-directed il-2 fusion protein that is designed to drive il-2 signaling exclusively on effector t cells — are eyeing similar applications. this cis-targeting could be used to selectively activate cell therapies, says asher co-founder and cso ivana djuretic.one outside-the-box idea for channeling the immunotherapeutic power of il-2 comes from aulos bioscience, a spinoff of rehovot, israel’s biolojic design. as ceo aron knickerbocker points out, the current pipeline of il-2 muteins, mimetics and protein fusions may offer greater receptor selectivity and tumor targeting than the approved form of recombinant il-2 — but they only solve for part of the equation. invariably, the immune cells these therapeutic candidates activate will start secreting their own wild-type il-2, which will lack any receptor bias. treg cells may then jump into action, setting off a feedback loop that could suppress the precise immune responses the treatments were meant to instigate.with its au-007 drug candidate, we can turn that negative feedback loop into a kind of a virtuous positive feedback, knickerbocker claims. that’s because the human igg1 mab is selective to the α-chain–binding portion of il-2, so it blocks activation of trimeric receptors on treg cells and endothelial cells, while still allowing the cytokine to stimulate effector t cells — regardless of the type of il-2 doing the signaling. as detailed at the asco meeting, aulos’s first-in-human trial is evaluating the mab as a monotherapy and in combination with proleukin.meanwhile, a growing number of companies — abbvie, amgen, merck, sanofi and others — are testing therapies designed to harness il-2’s potential for non-oncology indications, mostly autoimmune disorders such as lupus, diabetes and inflammatory bowel disease. as immunopathologist abul abbas from the university of california, san francisco, points out: the principle in autoimmunity is the same — just the flip side.instead of avoiding α-chain binding, for these conditions the goal is to create il-2 muteins with enhanced affinity for α-chain–bearing trimeric receptors on treg cells. most companies also tack on a half-life-extending protein to improve the pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of their cytokine therapies — although, according to clinical immunologist david klatzmann of the sorbonne university in paris, even unmodified il-2 may be helpful in autoimmunity, if given at low concentrations.for more than a decade, klatzmann and his colleagues have been evaluating low-dose il-2 as a treatment for virus-induced vasculitis, type 1 diabetes and a range of other autoimmune diseases. his company, paris-based iltoo pharma, is now developing the strategy further. it’s going to be an efficient and inexpensive molecule, says klatzmann, who heads iltoo’s scientific advisory board. (abbas is also a member.) in fact, klatzmann believes so strongly in the potential of low-dose il-2 in its natural form that he is calling this the corticosteroid of the twenty-first century.at the same time, he adds, i believe that you can improve il-2 and make it better for certain clinical settings, like highly inflammatory ones.improved il-2 agents and the engineering know-how that has led to them have started to trickle over into the pursuit of other cytokine-based therapeutics — those built around il-12, il-15 and il-21 chief among them. there’s huge interest in the biology of other immunocytokines and other cytokine payloads, says bertolt kreft, cso of bright peak therapeutics, a company that makes its cytokine muteins entirely through chemical protein synthesis technologies, no cell-based manufacturing required.bright peak is developing its own il-2 therapy, and it is also applying its synthetic platform to engineering lesser-studied cytokines such as il-7 and il-18. people acknowledge the value of il-2 and il-15, kreft says, but they also realize that cytokines can do much more than that.somerville, ma, usaelie dolginyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarreprints and permissionsdolgin, e. il-2 upgrades show promise at asco. nat biotechnol 40, 986–988 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01390-3download citationpublished: 13 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01390-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 