carbon nanotube field-effect transistors that are fabricated using aligned nanotube arrays exhibit an identical sequence of random ternary bits, which can be separated and used to generate security keys for encrypted communications.you have full access to this article via your institution.communication of sensitive information requires encryption and this relies on the generation, storage and retrieval of unique keys. these keys are used to generate an encrypted output that authenticates electronic devices. most approaches use keys that are programmed into non-volatile memory but this makes them vulnerable to physical and side channel attacks (such as when an attacker gets information about keys by observing consumed power or emitted radiation1). the problem can be overcome by using physically unclonable functions (pufs): hardware-based security primitives that are unique and unclonable2. pufs use random imperfections in a physical entity, typically caused by fabrication process variations. for example, silicon-based pufs leverage variations in integrated circuits, such as variation in dopants, defects and device dimensions3. however, silicon pufs can have a large bit-error-rate as their functionality can be disturbed by supply voltage or temperature variations during operation. the imperfections and high degree of randomness in many nanomaterials — such as the fluorescence of inkjet-printed semiconducting core–shell quantum dots4 — can also be exploited to generate robust and tamper-resistant primitives. however, such approaches that use optical inspection for key generation can be a challenge to integrate with many electronics applications due to the need for high-cost microscopes and optical readout for key generation.single-walled carbon nanotubes have been extensively explored as a channel material for field-effect transistors (fets), but challenges — such as high metallic nanotube impurity, variation in performance and difficulties in assembling the nanotubes into fets at large scale — have limited the development of high-performance integrated circuits5,6. these imperfections, however, make them a good candidate for creating robust pufs, and nanotube-based pufs have recently been reported1,7. in particular, nanotubes have been self-assembled into hafnium oxide trenches to create open and closed connections that correspond to bit values of ‘0’ and ‘1’. two advantages of nanotube pufs are that they offer high immunity to environmental noise and require a low fabrication temperature. writing in nature electronics, lian-mao peng, zhiyong zhang and colleagues now show that aligned arrays of carbon nanotubes can be used to fabricate pairs of identical (or ‘twin’) pufs8. the twin pufs can be placed into two different electronic devices to generate keys instantly once communication is started, and then encrypt and decrypt the information from two sides to enable authentication.the researchers — who are based at peking university and ji hua laboratory, guangdong — create aligned nanotube arrays on a single-crystal quartz substrate using an iron catalyst. fets made parallel to the growth direction of these nanotubes will be identical, but fets made perpendicular to the growth direction will contain nanotubes with random chirality and position. depending on the chirality, a nanotube fet can have metallic or semiconducting characteristics. this leads to three types of fet: a metallic fet, a semiconducting fet and an fet with no nanotubes in the channel (‘open channel’). these fets have very different characteristics. for example, the open fet has a very low on-current and on/off ratio, the metallic fet has a higher on-current than the semiconducting fet but a much lower on/off ratio (<10), while the on/off ratios of semiconducting fets can range widely (102–106) but are much higher than metallic fets (fig. 1). these different characteristics can be used to generate ternary bits (with three different bit values), resulting in a much larger combination of keys than keys using binary bits (for a 300-bit key, about 1050 larger). to generate keys with maximum randomness and entropy, the three types of fet need to occur with equal probability (that is, one-third), which is achieved by tuning the nanotube array density and fet channel width.a, schematic showing metallic (m), semiconducting (s) and open channel (o) carbon nanotube fets. b, typical on-current and on/off ratio of the three types of fet. c, nanotube puf-generated ternary keys including 1,600 bits. green, blue and red circles represent open (0,0), semiconducting (1,0) and metallic (1,1) bits, respectively. panel c reproduced with permission from ref. 8, springer nature ltd.peng, zhang and colleagues show that their pufs can offer high uniqueness and reliability. the inter-hamming distance measures uniqueness — the tendency of a puf to be different from another — and should be close to an ideal value of two-thirds if ternary bits are considered1. the researchers demonstrate that a set of 25 64-bit keys exhibit a normalized inter-hamming distance centred at 66.8%. they also observe no change in a set of fets after storage for six months. after treatment of nanotubes at 100 °c, the on/off ratio decreases by a decade on average, but there was no change in the fundamental type of the fets. this indicates that the nanotube pufs are highly reliable, primarily due to the large noise margin in the electrical characteristics of the three different types of fet and the inherent stability of nanotube randomness. finally, when two 531-bit keys were made from two closely spaced, perpendicularly aligned rows of fets on the same nanotube array, and then separated from each other, they showed the same twinned pattern of random ternary bits, with a consistency of approximately 95%.these twin pufs could potentially be used to develop a reliable technology for secure information exchange. the pufs are compatible with nanotube-based electronic circuits, but for broader applicability their integration with mature silicon integrated circuits and emerging flexible and printed electronics needs to be demonstrated9. integrated circuits can also be subject to high temperatures, and two identical pufs may show different characteristics when operating at different temperatures. post-processing methods and fault-tolerant designs will also need to be developed to address the error in the encryption and decryption process introduced in such scenarios.hu, z. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 11, 559–565 (2016).article google scholar devadas, s. et al. in 2008 ieee int. conf. rfid 58–64 (ieee, 2008).gassend, b., clarke, d., van dijk, m. & devadas, s. in proc. 9th acm conf. comput. commun. secur. (ed. atluri, v.) 148–160 (acm, 2002).liu, y. et al. nat. commun. 10, 2409 (2019).article google scholar kang, s. j. et al. nat. nanotechnol. 2, 230–236 (2007).article google scholar kumar, s., pimparkar, n., murthy, j. y. & alam, m. a. appl. phys. lett. 88, 123505 (2006).article google scholar kumar, n. et al. ieee internet of things j. 6, 325–334 (2018).article google scholar zhong, d. et al. nat. electron. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00787-x (2022).scholz, a. et al. nat. commun. 11, 5543 (2020).article google scholar download referencesg. w. woodruff school of mechanical engineering, georgia institute of technology, atlanta, ga, usasatish kumaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to satish kumar.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionskumar, s. security keys from paired up nanotube devices. nat electron 5, 412–413 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00805-ydownload citationpublished: 15 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00805-yanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 