a directed evolution approach delivers ribosomes with highly functional tethered subunits. combining the decoding and peptidyl transferase activities of the ribosome into a single entity sets the scene for more efficient protein engineering technologies.you have full access to this article via your institution.in a seminal paper in 1968, francis crick explained the apparent immutability of the genetic code throughout evolution as a frozen accident1. it is now accepted that the genetic code had a single origin and was preserved in its current state, with minor exceptions, because primordial cells soon became dependent on the exact chemical composition of their early proteomes. just like the code itself, the ribosome, the macromolecular machine that synthesizes proteins, has maintained its fundamental functional and structural features across all the kingdoms of life, including the fact that its two core activities — the decoding of genetic messages and the catalysis of peptide bonds — are separated into two subunits that need to come together to form a functional protein synthesizing machine. however, just as it was proven that the genetic code was actually malleable — enabling the insertion of over 70 different unnatural amino acids when appropriate directed evolution approaches were applied—the requirement for physical separation of the ribosomal subunits has also turned out to be an evolutionary eccentricity2. now, using a new laboratory selection approach, kim et al. have evolved a highly functional single-subunit ribosome with an improved ability to incorporate unnatural amino acids3.proof that the physically joining of the small and large subunits of the ribosome was possible was accomplished by producing a fusion rna containing the small (16s) and large (23s) subunit ribosomal rnas (rrnas) from escherichia coli4,5. tethering the ribosomal subunits via helix 44 of the 16s rrna and helix 101 of the 23s rrna produced functional ribosomes; however, they were not very efficient and could also interfere with endogenous untethered subunits, likely because of the flexibility of the linker rna sequences used6. because the slow growth of bacteria expressing tethered ribosomes limited their applications in even simple biochemical assays, in subsequent studies second-generation linkers were engineered that prevented interactions with endogenous ribosomal subunits and improved growth of host cells6,7. tethering the small and large subunits of the ribosome enables its decoding and peptidyl transferase activities to be linked. this becomes truly powerful when achieved in the context of an orthogonal ribosome. orthogonal ribosomes recognize and translate only a few artificial mrnas and not the natural transcriptome of the cell8. because orthogonal ribosomes are no longer constrained by the need to synthesize the cellular proteome, they can be further manipulated in ways that would otherwise be lethal. once they are tethered, this includes the ability to manipulate the peptidyl transferase center, an approach that previously enabled it to be evolved to effectively translate nascent peptides that normally cause stalling of native ribosomes4,6.although the two tethering rna strands of the engineered ribosomes base-pair with each other directly, the sequences encoding them are distant in the primary dna sequence of the tethered rrna gene. this required that the second-generation tethers be selected from small-scale libraries with only a few hundred members, due to the throughput of selection and of sequencing clones from libraries with distant sites mutated. because of this limitation, second-generation ribosome tethers remained limited by their low activity. in this issue of nature chemical biology, kim et al.3 report evolink, a next-generation library construction approach that enables the assessment of the effects of distant mutations in the same sequencing read (fig. 1). the team first introduced diverse mutations into the two tether regions (fig. 1a) and selected highly functional mutants by serial passaging of the libraries in bacterial cells in which the genes provided the only source of ribosomes for the cell (fig. 1b). they then took advantage of a simple molecular biology trick, using pcr followed by re-ligation to bring distant dna sequences into close proximity (fig. 1c). this enabled short-read deep-sequencing-based screening of many hundreds of thousands of ribosome tether mutants. the strict selection scheme produced a third-generation tethered ribosome (ribo-t v3) that enables cells to double twice as fast as the previous best tethered ribosomes and that significantly increased orthogonal protein expression (fig. 1d). furthermore, the lag time during growth was reduced. interestingly, ribo-t v3 also enabled the improved incorporation of the unnatural amino acid 2-amino-3-(7-(diethylamino)-2-oxo-2h-chromene-3-carboxamido) propanoate (decp) into proteins.a, ribosomal rna (rrna) regions that are distant in the primary sequence were mutated to produce libraries of tethered ribosomes with varied linkers. b, enrichment of engineered ribosomes that supported faster growth of bacteria enabled the selection of highly functional tethered ribosomes. c, pcr followed by re-ligation connects distant regions to enable next generation sequencing of the genes for optimal tethered rrnas. d, optimized ribosomes discovered by evolink enabled more efficient incorporation of the unnatural amino acid 2-amino-3-(7-(diethylamino)-2-oxo-2h-chromene-3-carboxamido) propanoate (decp).in natural ribosomes found in diverse organisms, even minor changes in composition can enable the emergence of populations of ribosomes with different translational properties9. engineered ribosomes whose decoding and peptidyl transferase activities are no longer required for cell viability provide the opportunity to shift far beyond these natural variations, potentially even paving the way for an aspirational goal in the field: ribosomes that could synthesize completely unnatural polymers according to a programmable genetic code2,9. intriguingly, although ribo-t v3 incorporates the unnatural amino acid decp more efficiently, the peptidyl transferase center was not altered in these experiments, only the tether. a study of the fidelity of the original ribo-t showed that it displays the same frequency of translational misreading errors but was susceptible to frameshifting and stop codon readthrough10. this may explain the ability of ribo-t v3 to preferentially incorporate decp. dynamic rotation and repositioning of the ribosomal subunits occurs at each step of the natural translation cycle. constraining the conformational dynamics between subunits could represent a previously unanticipated avenue for manipulating translation afforded by tethered ribosomes. with an efficient and fully orthogonal ribosome as a scaffold for future engineering, the stage is now set to explore the possibilities for a protein-synthesizing machine unconstrained by the frozen accident of its birth.crick, f. h. j. mol. biol. 38, 367–379 (1968).cas article google scholar de la torre, d. & chin, j. w. nat. rev. genet. 22, 169–184 (2021).article google scholar kim, d. s. et al. nat. chem. biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01064-w (2022).orelle, c., carlson, e. d., szal, t., florin, t., jewett, m. c. & mankin, a. s. nature. 524, 119–124 (2015).cas article google scholar fried, s. d., schmied, w. h., uttamapinant, c. & chin, j. w. angew. chem. 127, 12982–12985 (2015).article google scholar schmied, w. h., tnimov, z., uttamapinant, c., rae, c. d., fried, s. d. & chin, j. w. nature 564, 444–448 (2018).cas article google scholar carlson, e. d. et al. nat. commun. 10, 3920 (2019).article google scholar rackham, o. & chin, j. w. nat. chem. biol. 1, 159–166 (2005).cas article google scholar filipovska, a. & rackham, o. febs lett. 587, 1189–1197 (2013).cas article google scholar fabret, c. & namy, o. nucleic acids res. 49, 5308–5318 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesharry perkins institute of medical research, nedlands, western australia, australiaaleksandra filipovska & oliver rackhamarc centre of excellence in synthetic biology, university of western australia centre for medical research, nedlands, western australia, australiaaleksandra filipovska & oliver rackhamschool of molecular sciences, the university of western australia, crawley, western australia, australiaaleksandra filipovskatelethon kids institute, northern entrance, perth children’s hospital, nedlands, western australia, australiaaleksandra filipovska & oliver rackhamcurtin medical school, curtin university, bentley, western australia, australiaoliver rackhamcurtin health innovation research institute, curtin university, bentley, western australia, australiaoliver rackhamyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to oliver rackham.the authors declare no competing financial interests.reprints and permissionsfilipovska, a., rackham, o. shackled ribosomes unleashed. nat chem biol 18, 918–920 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01020-8download citationpublished: 14 july 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01020-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 