as deaths attributable to climate change increase, there has been a call from some scientists for the inclusion of climate-related data on death certificates. however, others argue that there are more important methods to reduce the impacts of climate extremes on people.you have full access to this article via your institution.for as long as humans have called central australia home, they have had to endure the region’s sweltering summer heat. the area’s indigenous peoples found ways to adapt, remaining still and quiet during the hottest parts of the day, and saving hunting and gathering for the relative cool of evening. climbing temperatures in recent decades, along with marginalization and grinding poverty, have tested the strategies that have served the indigenous australians for millennia.as a specialist physician in alice springs, a town in central australia where summers reach 48 °c, simon quilty sees these impacts first-hand. from the hottest months of november to february, many of the area’s sickest and most vulnerable patients end up in the hospital, their hearts, lungs and kidneys on the verge of giving out. some of them succumb to their illnesses. quilty knows that the formal cause of death is listed as everything from cardiac arrest to renal insufficiency to multi-organ failure. although first nations people in the area have some of the highest rates of heart and kidney disease in the world, quilty noticed that heat itself is rarely mentioned as a contributor.when quilty teamed up with a group of like-minded australian physicians to evaluate the country’s tally of heat-related deaths, he suspected that the true number of deaths was higher than the official counts. but he was shocked that their calculations showed that heat was linked to 36 times more deaths than officially recorded on death certificates (t. longden et al. lancet planet. health 4, e171; 2020). and with climate change poised to increase both the number and severity of heatwaves, the authors say the world is facing an urgent need to recognize and record these deaths.to this end, quilty, and his co-author arnagretta hunter, a cardiologist at the australian national university, have begun advocating for the inclusion of climate-related data on death certificates. the move, they say, will help scientists to better track the complex but important relationship between health and heat. not only will such a move give policymakers better data with which to make decisions, the information might also spur interventions to help the world’s most vulnerable people.in the late 1500s, the city of london began publishing bills of mortality — records of every burial in local parishes alongside the purported cause of death. not surprisingly, the weekly lists contained entries of fever and stillbirth as causes of death, alongside more quaint (and unpleasant) issues such as scalded in a brewer’s mash and, simply, worms. even today, epidemiologists can use these bills to estimate mortality from the city’s regular outbreaks of bubonic plague. although calls to bring out your dead may have been most famously captured in a monty python skit, the efforts were more than just a mathematical exercise for morbid-minded pencil pushers. they provided a quantitative measurement, however primitive, of the health of the whole population.what began more than 400 years ago as a bare-bones record of what was killing london residents has evolved in many parts of the world as the formal issuance of death certificates. these pieces of paper or electronic records provide information about the deceased, the time and place of their death, and what medical factors may have contributed. although most countries have laws requiring the registration of deaths, many low- and middle-income countries struggle to certify even a portion of their deaths. even when they do, important information can be absent.there’s almost no standard in what should go on a death certificate, says john mutter, a geoscientist at columbia university, usa, who also studies natural disasters.in the united states, death certificates are rather lengthy and require approval by a medical examiner or coroner. in the united kingdom and other commonwealth countries, death certificates often contain less information, but can be issued and recorded more quickly. in no case do death certificates require input on the environmental (climate) conditions surrounding a death.this, largely, may be related to difficulties in recording and attributing deaths to environmental factors, even extreme events. for example, immediately after hurricane maria, which hit in 2017, the trump administration held that a mere 66 people were killed by the hurricane itself — at least according to what was listed on death certificates. however, this number doesn’t reflect the true death toll as a result of the hurricane, which can instead be found in calculations of excess mortality.the term ‘excess mortality’ is a formal statistical definition of some rather hypothetical questions. epidemiologists first measure the total number of deaths that did occur after the event in question and then, using historical data, estimate the number of deaths that would have happened if the disaster did not occur. the difference between the two numbers is the excess mortality. after hurricane maria, for example, epidemiologists found a dramatic increase in deaths from all causes, including heart attack, respiratory arrest and uncontrolled diabetes. and death rates can remain elevated for months after an event, especially if basic and medical infrastructures are overwhelmed or damaged.extreme heat is no stranger to australia. even before anthropogenic shifts in weather patterns, the country’s heat was legendary. yet between 2006 and 2017, australia officially recorded just 993 heat-related deaths, a number so small that hunter and quilty found it strange. on the basis of what both physicians were seeing in their practices, they suspected that the number should be much higher. so they returned to the data and began painstakingly recalculating the number of deaths that were related to heat, regardless of the official cause of death. their calculations showed a reality where heat had caused the deaths of 36,765 australians in 11 years.to hunter, the work revealed the profound inadequacy of death certificates’ ability to account for environmental conditions. and with australia’s heatwaves projected to get even hotter, hunter fears that the country (and the world) is not prepared to measure the true death toll from climate change. one improvement, she says, would be to create a place on death certificates specifically to account for environmental conditions.a really important part of understanding the health impacts of climate change is being able to better understand it from a numerical or data-driven perspective, hunter says. if we restrict ourselves to the biological model, just looking at a disease diagnosis and cellular mechanisms, we can’t protect the global community in case of climate change.mutter agrees that adding a place on death certificates where coroners can record relevant environmental information would be useful.but not everyone is convinced.we can do a lot more to reduce the impact of heatwaves on people or climate extremes, but death certificates is not it, says debarati guha-sapir of the catholic university of lovain in belgium. we need to have sound studies looking at risk factors.for one, disaster epidemiologists like guha-sapir say that ‘climate change’ is simply not a medical diagnosis. including it on a death certificate would be a physician’s opinion, nothing more. what’s more, many parts of the world don’t regularly issue death certificates for everyone, leaving many of the most vulnerable populations uncounted. and it’s these people, especially the urban poor, who are most likely to suffer from the effects of climate change, she says. the effort, guha-sapir argues, would be better served by bolstering vital statistics collections more broadly. before you can add climate change, you need to have a death certificate, she says. antonio gasparrini (https://go.nature.com/3twextz), a biostatistician at the london school of hygiene and tropical medicine, uk, says that he understands the impulse but finds it questionable from a practical point of view. there are so many complexities in understanding the health effects of climate change.kristie ebi, an epidemiologist at the university of washington, seattle, concurs. on the face of it, it seems like a simple category to effectively communicate, she says. typically, it’s doctors who sign off on death certificates. how are they going to decide about climate?the other challenge with this approach is that a death may not happen concurrently with the climate-change-related extreme event, such as a heatwave. researchers know, for example, that heat-related deaths often have a 24-hour lag. monday’s excessive heat may not be seen until tuesday’s deaths. but this is relatively short compared with many other disasters. as seen with hurricane maria, impacts on mortality might not be felt for months, even years, after the initial event. and as climate disasters continue to pile up, it will become more and more challenging to attribute a single death to a specific climate-related event. over time, added stressors from droughts, flooding, hurricanes and heat will all take their toll. what looks like a heart attack on a comfortable spring day may actually have its roots in years of problems, explains friederike otto, a climatologist at imperial college london, uk.what makes these approaches so challenging is that climate change isn’t so much creating brand-new disasters or risks but rather exacerbating our planet’s existing proclivity towards extremes. flooding that historically occurred once every 5,000 years may now occur once a century. hurricanes have always existed, but warmer oceans make them bigger and stronger than previously possible. even a small increase in severity — a heatwave that is 1 °c hotter than normal — can lead to massive shifts in death rates.instead, climate health scientists like ebi and gasparrini have been adapting a long-standing analysis used in climate science to measure the health impacts of our changing world. known as detection and attribution studies, these analyses serve to determine whether an extreme weather event took place and, if it did, how much of that event was caused by climate change. to do this, researchers need to create a counterfactual, or a scenario, that models the weather conditions in the absence of anthropogenic climate change. these studies primarily focused on creating quantitative measurements of how much climate change contributed to events such as hurricanes, floods and heatwaves. otto’s recent detection and attribution report showed that climate change made the ongoing heatwave in india and pakistan 30 times more likely (https://go.nature.com/3npoml6). now, ebi believes that they can also provide valuable information about how climate change is affecting mortality as well.the approach adds another layer of analysis to excess mortality calculations. instead of just measuring the number of additional deaths related to an incident, statisticians take an extra step of determining how many of an event’s excess deaths can be attributed to climate change. this requires them to create two different counterfactuals, one where they calculate how many deaths would have occurred if the event didn’t happen, and the event’s severity in the absence of climate change. combining these two scenarios allows researchers to calculate the proportion of deaths from a disaster that can be attributed to climate change.disasters with stronger links to climate change often have a higher proportion of deaths attributable to climate, but not always. the built environment and basic infrastructure can mitigate — or exacerbate — these death tolls, and amruta nori-sarma, a postdoctoral fellow at boston university, usa, has been working to determine which measures work best.south korea began issuing extreme-heat forecasts in 2008, as part of the governmental heatwave health plans. the announcement of a heatwave alert triggers various preventive actions such as shade shelters and home health visits to vulnerable people. nori-sarma and colleagues took advantage of the fact that sometimes, when heatwaves were forecast, they didn’t happen (false positives) and that some heatwaves occurred without being forecast (false negatives). the researchers found that the alerts decreased respiratory and cardiovascular deaths in certain high-risk groups. the work shows that similar approaches could prove beneficial.we need to identify the most vulnerable populations and then we need to figure out how to reach them, nori-sarma says.the world desperately needs better data on the number of deaths caused by climate change, argues susan cutter (https://go.nature.com/3zzf6af), director of the hazards vulnerability and resilience institute at the university of south carolina, usa, because if you can’t measure it, the chances are you’re not going to manage it.and as nori-sarma’s work in south korea shows, these mitigation plans can make a difference, especially in the most vulnerable and marginalized populations.what you need is the information to make sure that you’re better prepared before you’ve got another [disaster], ebi says.quilty hopes that a fuller accounting of the death and suffering already being experienced as a result of climate change will provide leverage for policymakers to try and address the issue.they’re already severely stretched by climate change. people are getting desperate, quilty says. if artificial intelligence can predict what we want to buy next, we can figure out how to focus on what is really killing people.science journalist, richmond, va, usacarrie arnoldyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to carrie arnold.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsarnold, c. death by climate change. nat. clim. chang. 12, 607–609 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01411-8download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01411-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative nature climate change (2022)