a warmer world will shift mortality patterns around the world. research suggests that the mortality costs from climate change will be massively larger than previously thought, despite accounting for future adaptation and rising incomes.you have full access to this article via your institution.heat records are toppling across the globe — again. weeks of extreme heat in pakistan left large populations exposed to temperatures exceeding 50 °c for days. we are reminded of the heatwaves in 2010, which left 56,000 dead in russia, and 2003, which killed more than 70,000 across europe. anthropogenic climate change (agcc) will increase the frequency and intensity of these heat events across the globe. on the flipside, a warmer world will lead to milder winters and decreased cold-related mortality. furthermore, a richer, hotter world will be able to partially adapt to this new normal by increased air conditioning of the indoor environment. understanding the health risks from climate change and how adaptation alters them is an important question. a recent study in the quarterly journal of economics1 addresses this by compiling the largest dataset so far on subnational age-specific mortality rates, weather, climate and incomes, and developing a statistical model to project global mortality rates for the entire planet. the findings are bleak. the projected death toll in a high-emissions world is shown to be larger than all infectious disease deaths globally today, which is substantially higher than previous studies have suggested.translating future environmental change into economic outcomes relies on a so-called damage function between climate and economic sectors (for example, mortality, energy and agriculture)2. one of the main challenges is that as the climate changes, humans’ response to it changes owing to both growing incomes and climate change itself. for example, the adoption of air conditioning in a hotter and richer mexico city will make a 40 °c day less deadly per capita, compared with the same temperature occurring in today’s mexico city, as more people will want to and be able to afford to install air conditioners. the size of the income and adaptation effects on the shape of the damage function is fundamentally an empirical question. existing estimates of global damage functions for mortality rely on sparse data and have not really accounted for adaptation in a structured way that is consistent with observed behaviour.the author team from the climate impact lab (http://www.impactlab.org) spent years assembling data on age-specific mortality rates for 40 countries at the subnational (for example, us county) level covering 38% of the global population with representation across the spectrum of development. the study matches these mortality rates to weather experienced in the relevant year and spatial unit. they then build on insights from an earlier literature that recognizes that simply calibrating a statistical relationship between weather and mortality does not account for adaptation or income changes and hence is not valid for projection3. in their statistical model they introduce so-called interaction terms, which allow the shape of the damage function to vary depending on the level of income and the experienced long-run average of weather — the local climate. this allows the authors to calibrate a statistical relationship between weather and mortality that is climate and income specific and hence valid to be used in projections.once armed with income- and climate-specific damage functions, the authors project location-specific mortality across the entire globe, which includes locations that are not in their estimation sample — such as africa and india. the estimated impacts suggest an increase in global mortality rates of 73 deaths per 100,000 by the end of the century which is orders of magnitude higher than those obtained from integrated assessment models, such as the framework for uncertainty, negotiation and distribution (fund) model (http://www.fund-model.org) used in benefit–cost analysis, which suggests an increase of 0.33 deaths per 100,000 for the same years and scenario1,4.the study estimates how important adaptation and growing incomes are in reducing the death toll of agcc. without growing incomes, the mortality rate would be 116 deaths per 100,000 higher. a lack of adaptation to climate change would raise the number by another 31 deaths per 100,000 to a total of 221 deaths per 100,000. this implies that using the relationship between today’s weather and mortality would overestimate the mortality impacts of agcc by a factor of three.the cutting-edge data collection, statistical analysis and simulation exercise are complemented by a mathematical insight, which allows the authors to credibly estimate the ‘adaptation cost’ from climate change. using a not uncontroversial income-adjusted value of a statistical life, they estimate that an additional ton of co2 emitted today will cause mortality-driven economic damages of us$37 per ton of co2 emitted assuming continued high emissions. this estimate alone is 72% of the current social cost of carbon used by the us government in federal benefit–cost analysis5, suggesting that the currently used number is probably too low. the biden administration has committed to an update of this important number this year, which will update the employed damage function for a multitude of sectors.this first-rate study from carleton et al.1 represents the cutting edge of how to construct empirically grounded damage functions that carry a causal interpretation. critiques of this approach generally orbit around the fact that we do not have a crystal ball providing insights about the efficiency and cost of future (cooling) technologies and the fact that the estimation sample does not include all countries. the study carefully discusses the limitations of this approach, but also shows that including countries not in the sample (for example, india) leads to even higher estimates of mortality impacts. what worries me personally in the literature on climate change impacts is the underrepresentation of studies on the poorest and least electrified continent on earth — africa — which is largely due to data availability. this study provides estimates of damages for the continent based on the observed experience in the americas, europe and asia, which may not be valid counterfactuals. it is high time we pay more attention to africa in this literature and funding agencies should support large-scale data collection efforts.carleton, t. et al. q. j. econ. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjac020 (2022).carleton, t. a. & hsiang, s. m. science 353, aad9837 (2016).article google scholar kolstad, c. d. & moore, f. c. rev. environ. econ. policy https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rez024 (2020).anthoff, d. & tol, r. s. j. the climate framework for uncertainty, negotiation and distribution (fund): technical description, version 3.6 (2014).interagency working group on social cost of greenhouse gases, united states government technical support document: social cost of carbon, methane, and nitrous oxide interim estimates under executive order 13990 https://go.nature.com/3n5ebei (2021).download referencesuniversity of california berkeley, berkeley, ca, usamaximilian auffhammernational bureau of economic research, cambridge, ma, usamaximilian auffhammercesifo, munich, germanymaximilian auffhammeryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to maximilian auffhammer.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsauffhammer, m. the mortality cost of climate change. nat. clim. chang. 12, 614–615 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01420-7download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01420-7anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 