summits on climate change, organized by various (international) institutions on a frequent basis, seek to discuss and decide on future initiatives for climate action. research now shows that there is significant variation in their effectiveness in terms of climate mitigation.you have full access to this article via your institution.climate action and corresponding stepped-up efforts to alleviate climate-induced environmental changes are important issues in global governance and decision making. these discussions primarily take place in action-oriented climate summits that are high-profile meetings of governing bodies aiming to help with climate mitigation. to this end, these summits seek to provide actors with an interactive forum, to discuss future action to tackle climate change, and — possibly, although mostly non-bindingly — to make decisions and produce some outputs. examples for the last of these are, among others, transnational climate initiatives, that is, arrangements for climate adaptation and mitigation including at least one non-state or subnational actor that operates in at least two countries. it is important to ask whether and how effective these initiatives are and what the global community may gain from these. writing in nature climate change, sander chan and colleagues explain that there is substantial variation in transnational climate initiatives’ output performance when analysing data on 276 such initiatives1. in particular, they report that certain themes and monitoring can positively influence the output generation of transnational climate initiatives.transnational climate initiatives are non-binding policy outputs by definition, and the study by chan and colleagues thus adds to existing literature that discusses the effectiveness of less-binding (soft) and more-binding (hard law) policies. while previous research mostly focused on global environmental treaties2,3,4, consensus has yet to be reached on whether hard or soft law is the most effective concept. the present study adds to this debate, primarily via its focus on summit initiatives (soft law) that allow for a more disaggregated analysis.action-oriented climate summits are important ‘mega events’ that define steps towards climate mitigation5 and, additionally, can shape public opinion on environmental preferences and attitudes6. addressing climate change requires costly changes in behaviour down to the individual level, but also global action. this means that efforts by a sole actor (country or organization) are not enough, and a collective approach is necessary. here, international organizations and other institutions collaborate in helping states to implement climate mitigation7. as indicated, however, there is inconclusive evidence on the extent to which summits are effective in pushing states towards producing climate mitigation.chan and colleagues focus on transnational climate initiatives of climate summits and seek to examine their effectiveness at the output level1. effectiveness can take various forms, ranging from the output to the outcome to the impact level8. initiatives, as in this case, provide a starting point of a progression of effectiveness. although they are neither a necessary nor a sufficient requirement for a climate summit to be effective, they can be important instruments for policymaking. chan and colleagues compiled a new dataset of 276 transnational climate initiatives from between 2014 and 2019 based on announcements in climate summits. the merit of these data is the exploration of transnational initiatives at summits and mobilization processes, which goes beyond earlier studies on adaptation initiatives (for example, refs. 9,10,11).in light of this, the authors concentrate on output effectiveness and tackle the question of how many climate initiatives have been produced by summits over the years. the study first shows that output performance has improved over time (more initiatives), highlighting the impact of learning and continuous collaboration between actors. the authors then try to answer whether this output performance is related to summits’ focus. they find that the number of initiatives increases when the focus is on mitigation rather than adaptation. when comparing initiatives according to various characteristics, such as summit focus, theme, secretariats and monitoring, the results show that the average output does not increase over time, while adaptation initiatives still underperform (fewer initiatives) across summits in comparison with mitigation initiatives. the thematic areas that see higher performance (more initiatives) are transport, energy and industry. the findings also highlight that the presence of monitoring and designated secretariats are particularly strong drivers of output performance (more initiatives).chan and colleagues also discuss several limitations of their study, namely the operationalization of effectiveness, the inclusivity of initiatives without differentiating between genuine or ambitious, and the limited examination of orchestration12. nonetheless, this work addresses an important topic in the field of environmental politics — it suggests that the number of transnational initiatives increases over time, and indeed some processes (for example, focus, theme and monitoring) positively affect the number of initiatives. the data collection and this first analysis are very informative and are a crucial step towards further investigating the relationship between climate summits, climate initiatives and effective policymaking.chan, s. et al. nat. clim. change https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01405-6 (2022).article google scholar skjærseth, j. b., stokke, o. s. & wettestad, j. glob. environ. polit. 6, 104–120 (2006).article google scholar dzebo, a. int. environ. agreements 19, 447–466 (2019).article google scholar böhmelt, t. int. environ. agreements https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-022-09562-x (2022).article google scholar lövbrand, e., hjerpe, m. & linnér, b. o. environ. politics 26, 580–599 (2017).article google scholar bakaki, z. & bernauer, t. environ. politics 26, 1–26 (2017).article google scholar hale, t. & roger, c. rev. int. organ. 9, 59–82 (2014).article google scholar miles, e. l., andresen, s., carlin, e. m., skjærseth, j. b. & underdal, a. environmental regime effectiveness: confronting theory with evidence (mit press, 2001).szulecki, k., pattberg, p. & biermann, f. governance 24, 713–736 (2011).article google scholar bernauer, t. & böhmelt, t. environ. sci. policy 25, 196–206 (2013).article google scholar chan, s. & amling, w. int. environ. agreements 19, 429–446 (2019).article google scholar abbott, k. w., genschel, p., snidal, d. & zangl, b. br. j. polit. sci. 46, 719–729 (2016).article google scholar download referencesgovernment department, university of essex, colchester, ukzorzeta bakakiyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to zorzeta bakaki.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbakaki, z. the impact of climate summits. nat. clim. chang. 12, 611–612 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01416-3download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01416-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 