a new study shows that infra-slow cortical norepinephrine oscillations shape the micro-structure of sleep and transitions to micro-arousals, wakefulness or rapid eye movement (rem) sleep. prolonged descending phases of these oscillations promote the occurrence of spindle-rich intermediate sleep, which is involved in memory consolidation.you have full access to this article via your institution.sleep is a temporary and reversible loss of consciousness and is present throughout the animal kingdom. a common assumption is that for such a vulnerable state to have been preserved throughout evolution, it must sustain functions that are absolutely crucial for the survival of the individual. indeed, sleep has been shown to be involved in the health and maintenance of most bodily and cognitive functions, including memory. this role of sleep is likely to have co-evolved with safeguards that allow quick arousal in case of danger. wakefulness, rem and non-rem (nrem) sleep, and the transitions between these brain states, are under the tight control of a complex network of structures and neuromodulatory systems, including noradrenergic neuromodulation controlled by the locus coeruleus (lc)1. the norepinephrine (ne) neurotransmission system is crucial for the control of arousal and is the main target of many wake- and sleep-promoting medications2. in addition to rem and nrem states, sleep has a fine micro-architecture that includes very brief awakenings interspersed within nrem sleep, called micro-arousals. excessive micro-arousals that lead to pathological fragmentation of sleep impair memory performance3, but micro-arousals have also been shown to contribute to the homeostatic maintenance of cortical firing rates4. how the micro-architecture of sleep and the fluctuations in arousal levels affect sleep-dependent cognitive processes is still under investigation. in this issue of nature neuroscience, kjaerby et al5. report correlational and causal evidence that, in mice, lc-mediated ne neurotransmission in the medial prefrontal cortex (mpfc) is involved in shaping sleep micro-architecture and thereby influences memory consolidation.historically, lc activity and the resulting ne levels were thought to be high during wakefulness, intermediate or low during nrem sleep and absent during rem sleep6. however, as the booming development of increasingly specific genetically encoded fluorescent sensors for neuromodulators7 has allowed neuromodulatory systems to be dissected with unprecedented precision, a more recent body of work, including the paper by kjaerby et al5, has revealed a more complex picture. the lc is indeed completely silent during rem sleep but it shows irregular, burst-like activity during nrem sleep8, and the overall level of this activity is higher than during quiet wakefulness. but how does the lc activity sustain the ne levels that govern arousal state and sleep micro-structure? kjaerby et al5. performed challenging dual-fiber photometry recordings of both lc neuronal activity and ne levels in the prefrontal cortex, using the ne-specific sensor grabne2m. they established that the irregular activity of the lc during nrem sleep underlies infra-slow oscillations of ne levels in the prefrontal cortex, similar to those observed in the thalamus9.importantly, the authors found that these slow (30–50 s) oscillations shape the microarchitecture of sleep. specifically, the length of the descending phase of the ne oscillation in the mpfc influenced which of four brain states was most likely to follow: a micro-arousal characterized by a drop in sigma power; a micro-arousal characterized by both a drop in sigma power and muscle activity (which could be considered as a micro-awakening); full awakening; or rem sleep (fig. 1). the longer the descent, the higher the chance of awakening at the beginning of the next oscillatory cycle, when the lc resumes its activity; however, a sustained descent of ne levels past the micro-arousal and awakening ‘checkpoints’ preceded a transition to rem sleep (fig. 1). the authors confirmed this observation by applying tones at random times during the mice’s sleep in order to trigger ne release: tones applied when ne levels were low were more consistently followed by awakenings, and the subsequent ne rise in the mpfc was larger. this finding is surprising and somewhat at odds with previous reports that external inputs at higher ne levels facilitate awakening10.left, experimental setup combining fiber photometry in the mpfc and lc with eeg recordings to correlate activity of lc noradrenergic neurons with ne level and sigma power in the mpfc during sleep. right, schematic traces of ne signal in the mpfc, sigma power, and calcium signal in lc neurons. along the infra-slow ne oscillation, the longer the descent, the higher the arousal in the next state (micro-arousal, micro-awakening or full awakening). below a certain ne level, ne levels keep decreasing while the brain enters spindle-rich intermediate sleep (is) with enhanced sigma power and then transitions to rem sleep.spindles are waxing and waning 10–15 hz oscillatory patterns that emerge from local networks within the thalamus and propagate to the neocortex. the density of spindles can be approximated by the overall power in the sigma band calculated from the cortical eeg. spindles contribute to plasticity and memory consolidation by synchronizing the activity of neurons within the cortex and with other areas such as the hippocampus11,12. kjaerby et al5. provide evidence that the oscillations in the levels of ne in the mpfc during nrem sleep are negatively correlated with oscillatory changes in sigma power13, as previously established for thalamic ne levels9. the authors also showed that the prolonged descent in ne levels that leads to rem sleep was associated with a specific increase in sigma power that corresponds to the spindle-rich intermediate sleep that precedes rem episodes14. together, these findings suggest that inputs from the lc to the mpfc orchestrate the transitions from nrem sleep to rem sleep or microarousals and the related variations in sigma power.if spindles, microarousals and ne levels are all important players in the sleep orchestra, how are they linked to the mnemonic function of sleep? in other words, what are the consequences for memory of disrupting this sequentially organized micro-architecture? to try and answer these questions, kjaerby et al5. used bidirectional optogenetic modulation of the lc using the inhibitory and excitatory opsins arch and chr2, respectively. first, they inhibited lc neurons in sleeping mice for 2 min periods. this effectively prolonged the ne descent and increased the chances that the mice would enter a spindle-rich intermediate sleep episode followed by rem sleep. the wake-up rate was also increased upon termination of the stimulation. because optogenetic inhibition with arch is known to induce a rebound of activity after termination of the light stimulation, it is unfortunately impossible to determine whether these awakenings are a physiological rebound of the lc activity arising after the brain detects lower ne levels or a consequence of the release of the optogenetic inhibition.the authors then inhibited the lc during sleep after the mice had been trained on the classical object-recognition learning paradigm. in this task, the mice are exposed to two objects in a familiar environment and, after a delay, they are returned to the same environment in which one object has been replaced with a different one. mice that remember the previous objects will preferentially explore the new object. mice that received lc inhibition during sleep expressed an increased preference for the novel object, indicating that lc inhibition effectively enhanced the consolidation of the memory for the objects. individual performances correlated with the increase in sigma power, but not with any of the rem sleep parameters, confirming the role of cortical spindles in memory consolidation.to firmly establish a causal relationship between ne dynamics in the mpfc and memory consolidation, the authors performed the opposite manipulation. this time, they set up a closed-loop system to automatically stimulate lc neurons when ne levels in the mpfc were crossing gradually decreasing thresholds; the goal here was to decrease the amplitude of the oscillation. although it is notoriously difficult to selectively manipulate specific parameters of a brain oscillatory pattern without abolishing the oscillation completely, the optical activation of lc neurons strongly altered the infra-slow oscillation and kept the ne levels within a certain range, leading to a global decrease in sigma power, an increase in microarousals resulting in fragmented nrem sleep, and a decrease in rem sleep duration. the authors showed that optogenetic stimulation during sleep after training on the object recognition task significantly decreased performance in the recall test the next day. although rem sleep is not expected to be involved in the consolidation of this task, it is unknown whether the impairment in performance is due to a decrease in the sigma power alone or because the general architecture of sleep, including rem sleep, was modified by the manipulation. nevertheless, the result was corroborated in an experiment in which extracellular ne levels were elevated through administration of the ne reuptake inhibitor desipramine. spindles are believed to be important not only for episodic memory, but also for procedural memory15, and it would be informative to investigate whether this and other types of memory are affected by these manipulations.the study by kjaerby et al5. definitely establishes the lc-driven infra-slow ne oscillation as an important mechanism for shaping sleep micro-structure, the related variations in cortical spindles, and their influence on memory consolidation. it also raises further questions as to the generation of this oscillation: is there a pacemaker or an internal clock that controls lc activity? is there a feedback mechanism that senses cortical ne levels and other parameters, like the homeostatic pressure for rem and nrem sleep, and switches the lc on when ne levels are low? identifying the parameters that determine, along the descending phase of the oscillation, whether the system will move to a microarousal, awakening, or keep descending into spindle-rich intermediate sleep and subsequent rem sleep might be the next challenging and exciting step in the quest to better understand sleep.poe, g. r. et al. nat. rev. neurosci. 21, 644–659 (2020).cas article google scholar mitchell, h. a. & weinshenker, d. biochem. pharmacol. 79, 801–809 (2010).cas article google scholar bonnet, m. h. & arand, d. l. sleep. med. rev. 7, 297–310 (2003).article google scholar watson, b. o., levenstein, d., greene, j. p., gelinas, j. n. & buzsáki, g. neuron 90, 839–852 (2016).cas article google scholar kjaerby, c. et al. nat. neurosci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01102-9 (2022).article pubmed google scholar osorio-forero, a., cherrad, n., banterle, l., fernandez, l. m. j. & lüthi, a. int. j. mol. sci. 23, 5028 (2022).cas article google scholar wu, z., lin, d. & li, y. nat. rev. neurosci. 23, 257–274 (2022).cas article google scholar eschenko, o., magri, c., panzeri, s. & sara, s. j. cereb. cortex 22, 426–435 (2012).article google scholar osorio-forero, a. et al. curr. biol. 31, 5009–5023.e7 (2021).cas article google scholar hayat, h. et al. sci. adv. 6, eaaz4232 (2020).cas article google scholar peyrache, a. & seibt, j. philos. trans. r. soc. lond. b 375, 20190230 (2020).article google scholar dickey, c. w. et al. nat. commun. 12, 1027 (2021).cas article google scholar lecci, s. et al. sci. adv. 3, e1602026 (2017).article google scholar glin, l. et al. physiol. behav. 50, 951–953 (1991).cas article google scholar lustenberger, c. et al. curr. biol. 26, 2127–2136 (2016).cas article google scholar download referencesthis work was funded by the fyssen foundation and an embo post-doctoral fellowhip (j.f.m.), an atip-avenir grant, emergence(s) ville de paris, a narsad bbrf young investigator award and the fser (fondations schlumberger pour la recherche et l’education) (g.g.).institut du fer à moulin, umrs 1270, inserm, sorbonne université, paris, francejuan facundo morici & gabrielle girardeauyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to gabrielle girardeau.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmorici, j.f., girardeau, g. cortical norepinephrine grabs a seat at the sleep table. nat neurosci 25, 978–980 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01117-2download citationpublished: 07 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-022-01117-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 