why are some communities more vulnerable to wildfire smoke than others? burke et al. study human behaviour during wildfire events by leveraging multiple non-traditional data sources, including internet search results, twitter updates, and mobility and sensor data. their results will help to inform better and more equitable policy.you have full access to this article via your institution.wildfires are one example of climate-change-related environmental exposure, and there is increasing evidence for the adverse health and societal effects of wildfire smoke1,2,3. a recent analysis of 749 cities in 43 countries suggested that each year an average of 33,510 deaths can be attributed to acute wildfire-related exposure to pm2.5 (particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in size)4. in the us, wildfire-related deaths and healthcare cost an estimated $15 billion annually5. exposure to wildfire smoke and its adverse consequences varies across socioeconomic and racial or ethnic groups6, neighbourhood socioeconomic status7 and indigenous status8.to deploy effective prevention strategies in a timely and cost-efficient manner, we need to address a fundamental question: why are some groups of people more vulnerable than others?in a new study in nature human behaviour, burke et al9. harness several data sources to explore human knowledge, beliefs and behaviours in the presence of wildfire smoke, and how these vary depending on socioeconomic status.first, the authors estimate salience using google trends of search terms related to air quality, thereby quantifying whether humans exposed to wildfires are acutely aware of their exposure. the authors similarly quantify search activity related to protective behaviours to test whether exposure increases interest in purchasing protective equipment, such as purifiers, filters, and masks. in both cases, the authors analyse search trends in both english and spanish, which is especially important in the region they are studying, california. second, burke et al. estimate sentiment expressed in twitter updates as a function of smoke exposure, using natural language-processing algorithms. and third, the authors quantify population mobility using cell phone location data.the results of the authors’ measurements are unsurprising, but informative. burke et al. find that peoples’ awareness does not depend on their income level. however, their findings also show that people’s interest in protective equipment is income-dependent. this suggests that lower income groups forgo even searching for equipment, as they may not be in a position to make such a purchase. the negative effect of wildfire smoke exposure on the sentiment of local twitter updates is likewise stronger for higher-income counties. this could be, for instance, because lower-income neighbourhoods may have to deal with more pressing matters. finally, perhaps the most important finding of the paper is that household income dictates people’s ability to stay at home, probably owing to constraints related to the type of job they have.the overarching implication of this research is that members of disadvantaged groups may not be able to protect themselves despite their awareness of wildfire smoke exposures. this means that educational campaigns and reliance on individual decision making may not be enough to close the gap in protective behaviours. therefore, we need more individual-oriented policies; for example, high-efficiency particulate air (hepa) filters should be made available to everyone that does not have the means to buy one. not only would this immediately help the most susceptible to deal with smoke exposure, but it would also protect all future residents of the household regardless of income level. in the context of outdoor workers, individual-oriented policies are being enacted. on 29 july 2019, the california occupational safety and health standards board adopted an emergency regulation, protection from wildfire smoke, designed to protect outdoor workers from wildfire smoke.the researchers did an excellent job of trying to account for potential differences in technology use, for instance by using both spanish and english search terms in their analyses. nevertheless, it is possible that the analyses overlooked some communities. this is especially important in wildfire-prone california, with its diverse ethnic composition. one example is the predominance of vietnamese individuals in san jose. this serves as an important reminder that regions might need to run additional analyses to take into account their specific demographics.in addition, aside from the mobility data, the behavioural responses are a proxy for true actions. that is, we do not know how many people convert their google searches into buying equipment or whether their more negative sentiment increases their likelihood of purchase. finally, another important limitation is that the spatial resolution of the burke et al. analysis is at a county level, and therefore large behavioural differences within a county are not captured.although in this work burke et al. focus on wildfires, their novel approach of combining multiple non-traditional data sources serves as a blueprint for analysing human responses to a variety of extreme climate change-related events. although many studies have documented the negative externalities of these events and have prompted policy change, this study helps us to understand which policies could be improved to more equitably serve all people.grant, e. & runkle, j. d. j. clim. chang. health 6, 100110 (2022).article google scholar marlier, m. e., crnosija, n. & benmarhnia, t. preprint at essoar https://doi.org/10.1002/essoar.10510602.1 (2022).article google scholar zhou, x. et al. sci. adv. 7, eabi8789 (2021).article google scholar chen, g. et al. lancet planet. health 5, e579–e587 (2021).article google scholar fann, n. et al. sci. total environ. 610–611, 802–809 (2018).article google scholar liu, j. c. et al. am. j. epidemiol. 186, 730–735 (2017).article google scholar henderson, s. b., brauer, m., macnab, y. c. & kennedy, s. m. environ. health perspect. 119, 1266–1271 (2011).cas article google scholar hanigan, i. c., johnston, f. h. & morgan, g. g. environ. health 7, 42 (2008).article google scholar burke, m. et al. nat. hum. behav. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01396-6 (2022).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of statistics, harvard university, cambridge, ma, usazachary hervieux-mooredepartment of biostatistics, harvard t. h. chan school of public health, cambridge, ma, usafrancesca dominiciyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to francesca dominici.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionshervieux-moore, z., dominici, f. human behaviour and wildfire smoke. nat hum behav (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01400-zdownload citationpublished: 07 july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01400-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 