nitrogen-coordinated iron catalysts are exciting potential replacements for platinum at the cathode of proton-exchange membrane fuel cells, but still tend to have poor long-term durability. now, a thin and porous nitrogen-doped carbon film deposited at the surface of a highly active but unstable fe–n–c catalyst is shown to drastically improve its stability.you have full access to this article via your institution.proton-exchange membrane (pem) fuel cells are electrical power generators based on the electro-oxidation of h2 at the anode and the electro-reduction of o2 (from air) at the cathode. with h2o as the only reaction product, pem fuel cells are well suited for decarbonization of transport. pem fuel cells need catalysts based on platinum (pt) — a rare and expensive metal — at both electrodes to obtain useful power, but the amount needed at the cathode to ensure sufficient activity for the kinetically slow oxygen reduction reaction (orr) is particularly problematic. the us department of energy has set a challenging target to commercialize pem fuel cells for transportation: the combined total of platinum across both electrodes must not exceed 0.125 milligram pt (mgpt) cm–2 (ref. 1). this target has been a driving force for the development of platinum group metal (pgm)-free electrocatalysts for orr cathodes.today, the best pgm-free catalysts for orr are based on atomically-dispersed fe-ions coordinated by nitrogen atoms (that is, fen4) on partially graphitized porous carbon supports. while there have been breakthroughs in activity and power density, the long-term stability of these catalysts under practical, acidic fuel cell operating conditions has been lacking2. now, writing in nature energy, shengwen liu and colleagues across the united states report a drastic improvement in the stability of a highly active fe–n–c orr catalyst by applying a very thin n-doped porous carbon layer using chemical vapour deposition3.liu et al. begin by surrounding nanoparticles of fe2o3 with zif-8, a highly microporous zn-metal-organic-framework that has previously been shown to be an excellent carbon precursor in fe–n–c orr catalysts4. the resulting material is heat-treated in argon gas. during this heat-treatment, fe2o3 nanoparticles begin to disappear at 500°c and transform into orr-active fen4 catalytic sites. this catalyst is then mixed with nh4cl salts, followed by a heat treatment to decompose nh4cl in nh3 and hcl. this in situ treatment with nh3 produces a highly microporous catalyst that exhibits a very high initial orr activity of 41.1 ma cm–2 at 0.9 vir-free in a h2/o2 fuel cell and a maximum initial peak power density of 601 megawatt (mw) cm–2 under h2/air, but displays poor stability in h2/air fuel cells (fig. 1).figure adapted from ref. 3, springer nature ltd.large difference in durability behaviour displayed at 0.67 v by two fe–n–c catalysts under the same experimental conditions in h2/air, stressing the stabilizing effect on the highly active but unstable uncoated fe–n–c catalyst, of a very thin porous n-doped carbon film deposited at its surface, while decreasing only slightly its activity and performance.the stability breakthrough occurs when a ≤1 nm n-doped porous carbon layer is added to the fe–n–c material to yield a new catalyst. this catalyst presents slightly decreased activity, but a tremendous improvement in stability and durability in an h2/air pem fuel cell (fig. 1). accelerated stress tests (in which voltage is cycled up to 30,000 times) performed on the coated fe–n–c catalyst and a typical pt/c cathode (with an electrode loading of 0.1 mgpt cm–2) give practically identical polarization curves in h2/air fuel cells at the end of the test, demonstrating that the coated fe–n–c material is now a viable pgm-free catalyst.one of the keys to the improved stability lies in the specific structure of the catalysts. in most fe–n–c catalysts, there are two types of fen4 sites existing simultaneously in the same material: fen4 in which n atoms are of pyrrolic character (like in porphyrins); and fen4 in which n atoms are of pyridinic character (like in 1,10 phenanthroline). typically, most of the fen4 sites are found in the micropores (pores with size <2 nm) of the porous carbon supports5. according to a recent publication6, the fen4 sites with pyrrolic-type n are less stable in fuel cells than the fen4 sites with pyridinic-type n. in their work, liu et al. characterise their catalyst by mössbauer spectroscopy, confirming the presence of both types of fen4 catalytic site. however, the addition of the nanometric n-doped porous carbon layer to the disorganized n-doped carbon structure, which is hosting fen4 catalytic sites, leads to a transformation of some of the relatively unstable pyrrolic n-type fen4 sites into their more stable pyridinic n-type fen4 form. the stability to electro-oxidation at high potentials is also greatly improved.besides these important conclusions, the work from liu et al. also demonstrates that fe-demetallation is responsible for the instability of their highly active fe–n–c catalyst either by thermodynamic instability of some of the fen4 catalytic sites or by their electro-oxidation during fuel cell operation. this is in contrast to some literature that suggests that the release of h2o2 (an unwanted reaction intermediate formed by two-electron reduction of o2) and its reaction with [fe(h2o)6]2+, yielding fenton reactants, is the key degradation mechanism7. liu et al. deduce this important information from the fact that during voltage cycling stress tests of the fuel cells, the uncoated fe–n–c catalyst had nearly the same degradation in n2 gas pem fuel cells as in air (where the fe–n–c catalyst would therefore be in contact with o2 and possibly also some h2o2).although the work from liu et al. represents a big step towards the stabilization of fe–n–c electrocatalysts, there is still room for improvement; for instance, it is not yet clear why the coated catalyst still remains slightly unstable in the fuel cell (fig. 1). perhaps, obtaining a fe–n–c catalyst with 100% pyridinic n-type fen4 sites that are reported to be more stable than the pyrrolic n-type fen4 sites6 could solve this problem. furthermore, it will also be necessary to find a synthesis procedure more amenable to large-scale production. nevertheless, like previous breakthroughs in activity and power density, this work will also be a starting point for many future studies to further improve the most promising fe-based electrocatalysts for advanced pem fuel cells.in the version of this article initially published online, there was an error in the units shown in the y-axis of fig. 1, where (ma cm–2) rather than (a cm–2) should have appeared.multi-year research, development, and demonstration plan - fuel cells (energy.gov, 2016); https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2017/05/f34/fcto_myrdd_fuel_cells.pdfhe, y., liu, s., priest, c., shi, q. & wu, g. chem. soc. rev. 49, 3484–3524 (2020).article google scholar liu, s. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01062-1 (2022).proietti, e. et al. nat. commun. 2, 416 (2011).article google scholar jaouen, f., lefèvre, m., dodelet, j. p. & cai, m. j. phys. chem. b 110, 5553–5558 (2006).article google scholar li, j. et al. nat. catal. 4, 10–19 (2021).article google scholar meyerstein, d. nat. rev. chem. 5, 595–597 (2021).article google scholar download referencesinrs-énergie, matériaux et télécommunications, varennes, québec, canadajean-pol dodeletyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jean-pol dodelet.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsdodelet, jp. layer of stability. nat energy 7, 578–579 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01082-xdownload citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01082-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 