nitrogen is crucial for all known life, but it is predominantly found in its most unreactive form, gaseous dinitrogen (n2). the challenging process of nitrogen fixation, in which dinitrogen is chemically reduced to make bioavailable forms of nitrogen, is achieved in nature only by lightning, and by a group of bacteria and archaea called diazotrophs1. these microorganisms use clusters consisting of two fused cube-shaped molecules containing iron atoms to enable fixation, but the exact mode of binding and reduction of dinitrogen is still unclear. ohki et al.2 report in nature that iron atoms located at the corner of a synthetic cube-shaped molecule can bind and reduce dinitrogen, providing a fresh clue about the molecular machinery that nature uses for nitrogen fixation.it is well established that diazotrophs use enzymes called nitrogenases to reduce dinitrogen into ammonia (nh3), the key building block for the biosynthesis of molecules that make up proteins, dna and many vitamins. like several other enzymes found in nature, nitrogenases contain cube-shaped molecules, known as clusters, made from iron and sulfur atoms. such iron–sulfur clusters are generally used to transport and store electrons in enzymes. however, unlike other enzymes, nitrogenases also contain a cluster that looks as if two iron–sulfur cubes have been fused together around a single carbon atom (fig. 1a). the difficult tasks of binding dinitrogen and reducing it to ammonia take place at this cluster.figure 1 | a synthetic model of the active site of nitrogenase enzymes. a, nitrogenase enzymes ‘fix’ unreactive dinitrogen (n2) by converting it into ammonia, a bioavailable form of nitrogen. the active site responsible for fixation contains a molecular cluster that looks as though two cubes of iron and sulfur atoms have fused around a single carbon atom. the most active variant of the cluster also contains a molybdenum atom. studies suggest that, during nitrogen fixation, a sulfur atom is displaced, exposing an iron atom at which dinitrogen binds end-on. the line structure represents the ligand molecule bound to the molybdenum atom. b, ohki et al.2 have prepared a synthetic cluster that models the proposed binding site of dinitrogen in the nitrogenase active site. the bulky cpxl ligands cause the dinitrogen molecule to bind end-on to the single iron in the cluster, analogous to the proposed binding in a. moreover, the cluster chemically reduces the dinitrogen molecule sufficiently to enable its conversion to an ammonia analogue (not shown). (adapted from fig. 1 of ref. 2.)decades of biochemical analysis — mainly on fixation by the most active variant of the cluster, which contains a molybdenum atom — have provided valuable insights into how the cluster proceeds through 11 different proposed intermediates3. however, the instability of several of these intermediates has prohibited their structural characterization. insights into how and where dinitrogen binds to the cluster are especially sought after. a crystal structure of the cluster with a bound dinitrogen molecule was reported4 in 2020, but there is still debate about the interpretation of these data5. that said, a growing collection of studies indicates that one of the sulfur atoms that bridges the two cubes in the cluster is displaced, opening up a site on an iron atom at which dinitrogen binds3,4,6,7 (fig. 1a). read the paper: nitrogen reduction by the fe sites of synthetic [mo3s4fe] cubesthe challenges associated with isolating short-lived intermediates have motivated researchers studying synthetic inorganic chemistry to make structural and functional models of nitrogenases8–10. such model systems can provide support for the existence of proposed enzyme intermediates through comparison of their spectroscopic features. but binding a dinitrogen molecule to synthetic, cube-shaped iron–sulfur clusters is challenging, because it requires a binding site to be generated on an iron atom — which then attracts sulfur atoms of other clusters, leading to aggregation.the long-standing task of isolating a synthetic iron–sulfur cluster with a bound dinitrogen molecule was finally overcome last year11. however, no chemical reaction of the bound molecule was reported. this is probably because each atom of dinitrogen binds to a different cluster — a bridging binding mode that lowers the reactivity of the molecule.ohki et al. take things to the next level. they report cube-shaped metal–sulfur clusters containing a corner iron atom that binds dinitrogen in a ‘terminal’ mode. in this mode, only one of the two atoms in dinitrogen is bound to the iron atom (fig. 1b), thereby activating the other nitrogen atom so it can undergo chemical reactions.the key to this achievement lies in the attachment of large organic molecules, known as cpxl ligands, to the molybdenum atoms that are located on three corners of the cube-shaped cluster. the bulkiness of these cpxl ligands forces them into a conformation in which they fold around the space in which the dinitrogen molecule binds to the iron atom. this prevents another cluster from binding to the other nitrogen atom in the molecule, thereby enforcing the terminal binding mode. ohki et al. also show that dinitrogen binds in the less-reactive bridging binding mode when smaller cp ligands bind to the molybdenum atoms. highly reactive form of magnesium stabilized by bulky ligandsunlike nitrogenase, the authors’ synthetic clusters do not convert dinitrogen into ammonia catalytically. instead, ohki et al. demonstrate that their clusters catalyse the conversion of dinitrogen to an ammonia analogue in which silicon atoms are attached to the nitrogen atom. this reaction proceeds through a different mechanism from that of nitrogen fixation, however, and is known to be catalysed efficiently by molybdenum-based catalysts12.the synthetic cluster contains three molybdenum atoms, and, to mediate the catalytic conversion of dinitrogen, the cluster is subjected to reaction conditions that could make it fall apart. therefore, the possibility that this reaction is catalysed by an unidentified species other than the cluster itself cannot be excluded; this is acknowledged by the authors. however, ohki and co-workers demonstrate that they can selectively attach two silicon fragments to a dinitrogen molecule that is bound to the iron atom in their synthetic cluster — the first and most difficult step in the proposed cluster-catalysed reaction. this is a breakthrough, because it is the first demonstration that iron atoms in metal–sulfur clusters can bind to dinitrogen at one of its nitrogen atoms and simultaneously reduce the dinitrogen sufficiently to enable chemical modification of the other nitrogen atom.the chemical reactivity of ohki and colleagues’ synthetic cube-shaped clusters provides a valuable clue to how the molecular cluster in the active site of nitrogenase might bind to and reduce dinitrogen. however, chemists in this field are not out of a job yet, because there are still plenty of questions to be answered. perhaps the most pressing is, what is the role of the carbon atom at the centre of the cluster? the lessons in cluster design outlined by the authors will surely aid the development of synthetic models that mimic this aspect of nitrogenase’s fixation system, too.