sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (sglt2) inhibitor treatment affects central regulation of appetite and satiety, which results in increased carbohydrate intake. it has now been demonstrated that these effects might be blunted by combining sglt2 inhibitors with glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists to further facilitate weight loss in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to van ruiten, c. c. et al. combination therapy with exenatide decreases the dapagliflozin-induced changes in brain responses to anticipation and consumption of palatable food in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. diabetes obes. metab. https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.14732 (2022)overeating is an important evolutionary mechanism to allow people to survive periods of starvation and to maintain their body weight within a small range1. through increasing access to highly palatable and energy dense foods and reducing energy expenditure demands, industrialization has contributed in turning this evolutionary advantage into a health burden of obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm), cardiovascular disease and other ‘modern’ diseases2. prevention and treatment of obesity is challenging because food intake is tightly controlled by neuro-circuits in the hypothalamus and other brain areas that protect against negative energy balance and undernutrition1. hunger, appetite and satiety are regulated by a complex neuroendocrine system that constantly integrates signals from hormones derived from the gut, adipose tissue, liver or pancreas, as well as from nutrients1.several distinct brain areas are involved in homeostatic and hedonic mechanisms of food intake3. through the homeostatic drive of feeding, our body ensures that it has adequate nutrition, whereas hedonic or reward-related mechanisms are strongly modulated by palatability cues such as taste and smell3.through technological advances in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fmri) in the past two decades, important brain areas involved in reward-related food cues have been defined4. the fmri-estimated activity of areas such as the insula, amygdala, striatum, the prefrontal cortex and the orbitofrontal cortex reflect the reward response to food intake. intriguingly, patients with obesity or t2dm exhibit higher activity of central reward areas when watching palatable food images, but have lower activity during eating palatable, commercially processed convenience food than people of normal weight5. whether these changes in reward-related food intake are sufficient to explain chronic overeating that contributes to obesity and t2dm needs to be better studied.in the treatment of obesity and t2dm, behavioural interventions aiming at reducing food intake and increasing energy expenditure are frequently not effective due to complex and persistent hormonal, metabolic and neuroendocrine adaptations that defend against weight loss and promote weight regain. pharmacotherapies that promote weight loss might overcome these obstacles. sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (sglt2) inhibitors and glucagon-like peptide 1 (glp1) receptor agonists were developed in the past 20 years for the treatment of t2dm, obesity or both5. sglt2 inhibitors cause weight loss through increased urinary glucose excretion, whereas glp1 receptor agonists target the gut–brain axis, resulting in suppressed appetite, enhanced satiety and reduced body weight1,5. in clinical trials, the magnitude of weight loss in participants treated with sglt2 inhibitors was lower than in those receiving glp1 receptor agonists5. the 2–3 kg average weight loss upon sglt2 inhibitor treatment shown in these trials is lower than expected from the calculated loss of energy that sglt2 inhibitors should theoretically provide. indeed, patients with t2dm have been shown to compensate for the loss of glucose under treatment with the sglt2 inhibitor dapagliflozin by increasing sugar intake6. in fmri, activation of central food-reward areas has been shown during food picture exposure in patients with t2dm after dapagliflozin treatment, suggesting compensatory craving for food7.in diabetes obesity and metabolism, van ruiten and co-workers extend their previous findings7 by investigating whether dapagliflozin alters distinct brain responses to the anticipation, but also consumption of, palatable food8. in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 63 patients with obesity and t2dm were randomized into treatment arms of dapagliflozin 10 mg, exenatide twice-daily 10 μg, a combination of both or placebo8. treatment effects on brain responses to the anticipation of food and to the receipt of food were assessed by fmri after 10 days and again after 16 weeks of treatment8.the trial demonstrated that dapagliflozin increased the activity of food reward-related brain areas, the right amygdala and the caudate nucleus, to the anticipation of food after 10 days, but not after 16 weeks. importantly, the combination of dapagliflozin with exenatide led to a reduced activation of these brain areas both in response to food anticipation and to actual food receipt after 16 weeks of treatment, compared with placebo. compared with placebo, dapagliflozin, exenatide and the combination treatment caused statistically significant reductions in body weight. the observed changes in brain activation did not translate into statistically significant differences between dapagliflozin, exenatide or the combination of both treatment groups in body weight, adipose tissue mass or parameters of glucose metabolism. however, a statistically significant increase in carbohydrate intake after 16 weeks of dapagliflozin treatment, compared with all other groups, suggests that the discrepancy between expected and observed weight loss after sglt2 inhibitor treatment could be caused by specific activation of the brain areas involved in the regulation of hedonic feeding. dapagliflozin decreased activation of reward-related brain areas in response to palatable food when compared with placebo, suggesting a specific mechanism underlying compensatory carbohydrate overconsumption.the study supports the hypothesis that craving for specific food items might be induced by a lack of the particular nutrient provided by that food item. it remains unclear whether compensatory carbohydrate overeating in the dapagliflozin monotherapy group could be caused by fluctuations in plasma concentrations of glucose and insulin. in this context, exenatide could blunt the effects of dapagliflozin on specific brain area activation or metabolic responses by modulating postprandial glucose and insulin profiles. unfortunately, the study did not investigate the potential effects of changes in plasma levels of glucose, insulin or glucagon on outcome parameters, but generates the hypothesis that pharmacotherapy-specific interactions of key hormones and metabolites of glucose homeostasis contribute to the observed brain activation changes.sglt2 inhibitor treatment induces changes in brain activation that could lead to overeatingthis clinical trial supports the concept that sglt2 inhibitor treatment induces changes in brain activation that could lead to overeating as compensation for the energy loss by enhanced urinary glucose excretion. sglt2 inhibitors might reduce the meal-associated reward response and thereby contribute to compensatory carbohydrate overeating. whether the observed changes are caused by direct or indirect sglt2 inhibitor effects on the brain remains an open question. the study provides mechanistic insights suggesting that a combination of sglt2 inhibitors and glp1 receptor agonists can reduce the proposed compensatory overeating associated with sglt2 inhibitor therapy. although weight loss was not a primary outcome of the trial, patients receiving dapagliflozin in combination with exenatide lost more weight than patients receiving the monotherapies. therefore, the study indicates that combining sglt2 inhibitors with glp1 receptor agonists might increase the weight loss potential of the two drug classes in the treatment of patients with obesity and t2dm.müller, t. d., blüher, m., tschöp, m. h. & dimarchi, r. d. nat. rev. drug discov. 21, 201–223 (2022).blüher, m. nat. rev. endocrinol. 15, 288–298 (2019).saper, c. b., chou, t. c. & elmquist, j. k. neuron 36, 199–211 (2002).stice, e., spoor, s., bohon, c., veldhuizen, m. g. & small, d. m. j. abnorm. psychol. 117, 924–935 (2008).brown, e., heerspink, h. j. l., cuthbertson, d. j. & wilding, j. p. h. lancet 398, 262–276 (2021).horie, i. et al. diabetes res. clin. pract. 135, 178–184 (2018).van ruiten, c. c. et al. j. clin. endocrinol. metab. 107, e2590–e2599 (2022).van ruiten, c. c. et al. diabetes obes. metab. https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.14732 (2022).download referenceshelmholtz institute for metabolic, obesity and vascular research, university of leipzig, leipzig, germanymatthias blüherdepartment of endocrinology, nephrology, rheumatology, university of leipzig, leipzig, germanymatthias blüheryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to matthias blüher.m.b. received honoraria as a consultant and speaker from amgen, astrazeneca, bayer, boehringer-ingelheim, lilly, novo nordisk, novartis, pfizer and sanofi.reprints and permissionsblüher, m. glp1 receptor agonist overcomes sglt2 inhibitor-related overeating. nat rev endocrinol 18, 523–524 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-022-00722-2download citationpublished: 11 july 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-022-00722-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 