coherent multi-octave mid-infrared waveforms are created and manipulated by cascaded intrapulse difference-frequency generation, demonstrating absolute phase control, and adding to the growing arsenal of techniques for arbitrary light-wave control.you have full access to this article via your institution.ultrashort, tailored optical waveforms with oscillating electromagnetic fields of less than a single optical cycle in duration are of great interest for the control of electronic coherence in atoms and molecules. motivated by a plethora of applications and aided by advances in ultrafast lasers, control of sub-optical-cycle pulses is now possible in the mid-infrared region.now reporting in nature photonics, steinleitner et al. produce coherent emission over a broad range of the infrared spectrum, 0.9–12 μm, in the form of a 0.7-cycle optical pulse. the approach brings the intrinsic ability to manipulate the emerging waveform by controlling the phase of different spectral components1.achieving control over such a wide bandwidth is not trivial, yet the researchers do so by means of a relatively simple approach. single-cycle, carrier-envelope phase (cep)-stabilized pulses at 2.2 μm are produced by a cr:zns laser oscillator and a post-compression stage. the pulses are focused on a nonlinear zngep2 crystal, where they undergo frequency down-conversion via cascaded intrapulse difference-frequency generation (ipdfg). in this process, the pulses drive multiple orders of difference frequency mixing in the zngep2 crystal, creating overlapping spectral bands that generate an infrared supercontinuum radiation spanning 3.7 octaves (fig. 1). importantly, interference between different orders is affected by the cep of the driving pulses. the resulting sub-cycle waveform can therefore be manipulated through the cep locking electronics. for instance, the temporal profile of the waveform can be transformed from a clean cosine-pulse-like behaviour to a sine-like profile, while maintaining sub-cycle duration. this level of control has the potential to advance applications in which light fields are used to mould the flow of electrons with attosecond precision, for example, in low-gap semiconductors.two narrowband laser pulses (dashed black curves) act as driving pulses. down-converted radiation of different orders (zero–third) is produced in the nonlinear crystal. for a single broadband driving pulse, the progressive spectral broadening of the different orders will overlap to form a continuum (grey and light red curves). when the driving laser has a flat spectral phase, the cep of the odd orders (shaded in blue) follows the cep of the driving laser whereas the cep of even orders (shaded in orange) does not. thus, by varying the cep of the driving laser (between δφ = 0 and ±π, for instance, where δφ = 0 is referenced to the red curve) the continuum waveform can be modified, as seen by the difference between the grey and red curve. the waveform can vary by up to an order of magnitude in spectral intensity when there is strong interference as observed in the vicinity of 60 thz (shaded in red). credit: reproduced from ref. 1, springer nature ltd.a crucial prerequisite to obtain these results is the high stability of the cep of the cr:zns laser oscillator pulses used to drive the cascaded ipdfg process. the cep noise achieved by steinleitner et al. exhibits a root-mean-square jitter of only 11 mrad, equivalent to only 14 attoseconds of timing jitter between the carrier field and pulse envelope. this impressive capability is the culmination of two-decade long efforts aimed at achieving active cep control. owing to the unavoidable linear dispersion and nonlinear processes, the output from a mode-locked laser oscillator generally exhibits a pulse-to-pulse cep slip that results in a carrier-envelope offset frequency, fceo. an elegant self-referencing nonlinear interferometry technique to measure the fceo was demonstrated in 2000, in which the fceo can then be stabilized through a phase-locked loop that feeds back to the laser oscillator2, marking the beginning of a new era of optical phase control. now, if the fceo is locked to the nth subharmonic of the repetition rate, frep, constant and stable cep can be achieved by pulse picking every nth pulse in the pulse train3. steinleitner et al. use another newly developed cep stabilization concept that ingeniously locks fceo to 0 with a phase-locked loop. the two beat notes around frep, frep – fceo and frep + fceo, are extracted and used to generate the error signal in the phase-locked loop for locking fceo to 0 (ref. 4). pulse picking is thus not required, and the method does not suffer from the slow cep drift observed in other methods5. optimizing this new procedure allowed the team to demonstrate an unprecedented stability of the cep, which is key for the reproducible generation and control of the broad mid-infrared waveforms.these results increase the growing arsenal of methods available to shape pulses precisely by controlling the phase degrees of freedom of optical supercontinua. as bandwidth is widened to the levels needed for producing single- and sub-cycle transients, precise phase control is of utmost importance. this is true in terms of both the carrier-envelope and spectral phases. although the underlying field oscillation of a light pulse must be stable from pulse to pulse to ensure a steady waveform, short pulses are themselves created by the constructive interference of a wide bandwidth of electric field oscillations. constructive interference can be measured by the flatness of the group delay dispersion, a measure of spectral phase variation at quadratic order and higher. if group delay varies across the bandwidth by no more than roughly the fourier-limited duration of a spectrum, the pulse will be fully compressed. slight deviations beyond this maximum group delay variation cause dramatic changes to the pulse shape. for a 10-fs pulse, this means the optical path length difference for all frequencies within a pulse must be no more than a few micrometres to maintain a compressed pulse or any other pulse shape desired for an application.steinleitner et al. take a simple yet successful approach that relies on an octave-spanning wave that already has flat spectral phase, and perform the nonlinear interaction to widen the bandwidth in a very short medium that imparts no significant group delay dispersion. the incident pulse is already compressed and of high peak power, thus enabling the nonlinear frequency broadening interaction, while the short medium length allows it to remain compressed during the nonlinear interaction. finally, the flat spectral phase ensures strong interference between overlapping orders of the cascaded ipdfg.the path forward to realization of truly arbitrary control of light waves needed for the next generation of applications are likely to involve the use of several complementary approaches. exquisite cep control together with highly nonlinear techniques such as cascaded ipdfg allow controllable sub-cycle waveforms to be generated, and down to very low frequencies. other approaches provide additional pulse-tailoring capabilities that widen the sphere of control. adiabatic frequency conversion provides a way to robustly translate ultra-broadband pulses with precisely shaped spectral phases to other frequencies6,7 and to intrinsically engineer their spectral phases8. coherent pulse synthesis allows the coherent combination of any of these phase-controlled pulses into a waveform with even broader bandwidth9, and can be scaled to high pulse energies10. combined, these tools allow multi-octave optical continua to be tuned precisely in phase to all orders, making for a truly powerful technology for manipulating and probing materials with light.steinleitner, p. et al. nat. photon. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01001-2 (2022).article google scholar jones, d. j. et al. science 288, 635–639 (2000).ads article google scholar huang, s.-w. et al. nat. photon. 5, 475–479 (2011).ads article google scholar okubo, s. et al. optica 5, 188–192 (2018).ads article google scholar koke, s. et al. nat. photon. 4, 462–465 (2010).ads article google scholar suchowski, h., porat, g. & arie, a. laser photon. rev. 8, 333–367 (2014).ads article google scholar krogen, p. et al. nat. photon. 11, 222–226 (2017).ads article google scholar heberle, d. et al. self-dispersion-managed octave-spanning adiabatic frequency converter. in conf. lasers and electro-optics osa technical digest paper sth4e.2 (optica, 2022).manzoni, c. et al. laser photon. rev. 9, 129–171 (2015).ads article google scholar rossi, g. m. et al. nat. photon. 14, 629–635 (2020).ads article google scholar download referencesapplied & engineering physics, cornell university, ithaca, ny, usajeffrey moseselectrical, computer, and energy engineering, university of colorado boulder, boulder, co, usashu-wei huangyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jeffrey moses or shu-wei huang.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsmoses, j., huang, sw. broadband mid-infrared waveform generation. nat. photon. 16, 481–482 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01027-6download citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-022-01027-6anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 