legal mandates are critical to supporting action on sustainable development goals and climate change targets. yet, new research highlights the importance of initial endowments for energy transitions, and how they can lead to disparate outcomes across regions.you have full access to this article via your institution.past studies1,2,3 show that legally mandating climate actions can reduce co2 emissions, and, therefore, ease the environment–economy tradeoff and facilitate the achievement of sustainable development goals, conditional on institutional quality. despite this, enforcement of stringent environmental policies can be a challenge since, among others, fossil fuel energy sources are used for economic production and electricity supply. many emerging economies have poorer institutional frameworks where such laws may have weaker effects.now, writing in nature energy4, jing meng and colleagues in the uk and china find that while energy policies in the asia-pacific (apac) region have contributed to advancements on some energy-related sdgs, progress towards the energy transition has been heterogeneous among those emerging economies.to investigate how the energy transition is affected by the size of policy stock controlling for socio-economic factors (that is, urbanization rate, gdp per capita, export share, import share, and service share), the researchers adopted a two-way fixed effects model. four energy-related sdg targets are used as energy transition indicators: access to electricity, access to clean cooking, energy intensity and renewable electricity capacity5. policy stocks, that is, stocks of laws, rules or regulations, and strategy or plans, are linked to specific sdg targets, therefore providing a robust measure of aggregate effect of energy policies on energy transition.meng and colleagues first described the overall progress of the energy transition. while all the 42 apac countries have made significant progress towards electrification, there are systematic deficiencies by country groups: transition economies are behind on energy efficiency targets, developing economies on energy efficiency and renewable adoption, and least-developed countries (ldcs) are behind on access to clean cooking.the researchers’ discussion reinforces the fact that countries at different socio-economic and development stages have different priorities: more industrialized countries promote renewable energy and clean cooking whereas less developed countries primarily focus on eliminating energy poverty and improving energy access. overall, this results in a heterogeneous energy transition across the apac region.next, by comparing observed and counterfactual progress, the researchers find that enactment of energy policies has increased access to electricity by 3%, access to clean cooking by 3.8%, energy efficiency by 1.4% and renewable electricity capacity by 6.9% across the apac countries. meng and colleagues also estimated these effects for individual countries and identified that developing countries are progressing better than transition economies and ldcs because of their larger stock of energy policies. these findings further solidify earlier works showing that climate laws have reduced co2 emissions globally1, and justify the need for enhanced energy-transition commitments and actions within energy and climate policies.meng and colleagues then found that different types of targeted policies (that is, laws, regulations, and strategies) overall have positive effects on energy transition, with laws and regulations being more effective in improving access to electricity and clean cooking, whereas strategies — providing overall energy development directions and overarching long- and medium-term strategic goals — have more pervasive effects on enhancing energy efficiency. type of policies and associated targets depend on political and socio-economic conditions. for example, india’s federal structure warrants the adoption of more regulations, whereas vietnam, another developing economy, relies more on laws and strategies. the agricultural economy of myanmar finds strategies to be more effective, although to a limited extent, whereas the transition economy of kazakhstan finds it difficult to improve energy efficiency due to old soviet-era infrastructure6.due to their weaker institutions7 and lower economic abilities, ldcs often cannot effectively enforce their energy policies. for example, bangladesh currently has a total of 8 energy-related targets (for example, increasing the market share of improved biomass cookstoves to 70% in 2030) within its nationally determined contributions (ndcs) and 4 targets within national laws and policies8. rather than decarbonizing its power system and increasing the adoption of renewable energy sources, bangladesh prioritizes more fundamental issues of energy security and access to electricity for all. in comparison, india and vietnam have been able to increase both access to electricity and access to clean cooking technologies, an indication of lower environment–economy tradeoff and better progress towards sdgs.altogether, emerging economies in the global south experience the economy–environment tradeoff more acutely and their economic growth almost always comes with increased fossil fuel use. meng and colleagues recommended increased action in national policy commitments for energy transition targets. however, faced with more immediate priorities such as poverty alleviation and providing electricity access to all, many developing countries lack the necessary funding to install the renewable energy generation facilities essential for a net-zero transition. developed countries can play a climate responsible role by allocating greater shares of aid for renewable energy generation projects, which can finance the energy transition in the global south. currently, less than one-third of energy-related overseas aid is allocated for renewable energy (us$2.11 billion out of us$6.42 billion in 2019)9. along this line, future research can focus on investigating the effectiveness of energy finance and increased policy stringency on apac countries, or other groups of countries.eskander, s. m. & fankhauser, s. nat. clim. chang. 10, 750–756 (2020).article google scholar eskander, s. & fankhauser, s. the impact of climate legislation on trade-related carbon emissions, 1997–2017 (cccep, 2021); https://eprints.kingston.ac.uk/id/eprint/51029/6/eskander-s-m-s-u-51029-vor.pdfdechezleprêtre, a., gennaioli, c., martin, r., muûls, m. & stoerk, t. j. environ. econ. manage. 112, 102601 (2022).article google scholar chen, p. et al. nat. energy https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01029-2 (2022).article google scholar sdg7: data and projections (iea, 2020); https://www.iea.org/reports/sdg7-data-and-projectionslaldjebaev, m., isaev, r. & saukhimov, a. energy rep. 7, 3125–3136 (2021).article google scholar acemoglu, d., johnson, s., robinson, j. a. & yared, p. am. econ. rev. 98, 808–842 (2008).article google scholar climate change laws of the world (cclw, accessed 20 may 2022); https://climate-laws.org/creditor reporting system (crs) (oecd, 2022); https://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?datasetcode=crs1download referencesdepartment of economics, faculty of business and social sciences, kingston university london, london, ukshaikh m. s. u. eskandergrantham research institute on climate change and the environment (gri) and centre for climate change economics and policy (cccep), london school of economics and political science, london, ukshaikh m. s. u. eskanderyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to shaikh m. s. u. eskander.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionseskander, s.m.s.u. the heterogeneity of energy transition. nat energy 7, 574–575 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01064-zdownload citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-022-01064-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 