over the past 25 years, the photo-induced spin-crossover behaviour of fe(ii) complexes has puzzled scientists. now, a symmetry-breaking twisting mode has been observed during the relaxation of such a complex. controlling its configuration using enantiopure counterions has also been shown to slow down the relaxation.you have full access to this article via your institution.switching and reading the spin state of molecules and nanoparticles on ultrafast timescales is important for developing next-generation information storage and quantum technologies. spin-crossover compounds featuring iron, such as [feii(bpy)3]2+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine), have been studied for decades, and it is well-known that a fast change in spin state from s = 0 (low spin) to s = 2 (high spin) can take place in just 100 fs after optically exciting the metal-to-ligand charge-transfer band1. at the time of its discovery, this finding was surprising because of the need to conserve spin angular momentum after absorbing a photon, and the known typical (much longer) timescale for singlet-to-triplet conversion in organic molecules. the charge-transfer state decays into the high-spin metal-centred state concurrently with the expansion of the fe–n bonds via a breathing mode; however, other non-totally-symmetric modes are also involved in the dynamics2 and some questions about their nature and role remain open.as is the case for most chemical physics, the field moves forward when new techniques are introduced. for example, x-ray free-electron lasers have provided great insights into fe(ii) spin-crossover3,4. now, writing in nature chemistry, oppermann and colleagues have described the use of time-resolved circular dichroism (trcd) in the ultraviolet spectral region to interrogate the spin-state dynamics of an iron complex5. they identify torsional twisting modes involved in the relaxation of its high-spin state back to its low-spin ground state and show how such relaxation can be slowed through control of its configuration.circular dichroism (cd) arises because of a difference between absorption of left- and right-handed circularly polarized light by a chiral chromophore. in a time-resolved measurement, cd spectroscopy has the potential to give information on nuclear rearrangements in the excited state because of its structural sensitivity. however, trcd is a challenging technique because of weak signals: the difference in absorption between left- and right-handed circular light of a typical chiral molecule is on the order of 0.1%, and the time-resolved signal is around 1% of this signal! furthermore, most optical components will introduce some distortion to the spectrum. recently, oppermann and colleagues presented a femtosecond, broadband trcd spectrometer, demonstrating that they had overcome these challenges and achieved high sensitivity6. they have now put this set up to work studying [feii(dm-bpy)3]2+ (dm-bpy = 4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine) (fig. 1).the twist plays an important role in the decay of the high-spin state back to the low-spin ground state. δ and λ are the two enantiomers.the team of scientists used diastereomeric interactions between their iron complex and chiral phosphate counterions (trisphat; p(o2c6cl4)3−), to generate an enantiopure sample, which was key to enabling their measurements. initially, using transient absorption (ta) spectroscopy, the team could immediately observe that the lifetime of the high-spin state was four times longer for the enantiopure solution compared to the racemic solution. the team also carried out complementary transient absorption anisotropy (taa) experiments, which are transient absorption measurements as a function of the angle between the pump and the probe polarization directions. this technique can give information on the spatial distribution and alignment of dipoles in the ensemble of photoexcited molecules because the pump will preferentially excite molecules aligned along the laser polarization direction and the probe will monitor the decay of this alignment. the rich, spectrally resolved data were fitted to a global model, enabling oppermann and colleagues to conclude that there was a narrower distribution of the ligand angles for the enantiopure sample than for the racemic mixture. this meant that the diastereomeric interactions were limiting the lability of the metal–ligand bonds and hindering the decay back to the low-spin ground state.to better understand the structural dynamics during relaxation oppermann and colleagues turned to their improved circular dichroism set up. due to the excellent signal-to-noise ratio in their trcd measurements, they could carefully separate the cd spectrum of the high-spin state from that of the ground state. the cd spectrum for excitonically coupled ligand-centred transitions in a rigid octahedral environment, which are dominant for [feii(dm-bpy)3]2+, should yield a symmetric shape (a positive and negative feature at higher and lower energies, respectively, compared to the associated peak in the absorption spectrum), and this is indeed what was observed at early time delays for the enantiopure sample (fig. 2). however, the symmetric ratio of the intensities of the peaks decayed over tens of picoseconds, which indicates a structural change that breaks the octahedral symmetry. based on previous theoretical work, oppermann and colleagues could conclude that a separate reaction coordinate besides the commonly assumed (symmetrical) radial breathing mode is involved in the conversion of the high to the low-spin state.the blue line shows the symmetric band shapes at early time delays. at longer delays, an asymmetric band shape (orange) develops because of the sensitivity of trcd to symmetry-breaking torsional twisting modes. the asymmetry in the figure has been exaggerated compared to the spectra presented by oppermann and colleagues for display purposes.the distortion of the octahedral symmetry is important because it mixes the singlet and quintet states with intermediate triplet states, which couple the low and high-spin states. the nuclear motion that is involved in the torsional motion is identified by oppermann and colleagues as the ray–dutt twist (fig. 1) because of the asymmetric decay of the band shape in the trcd spectrum. the importance of twisting motion in the relaxation from high to low spin has previously been emphasized7,8,9, and now the trcd spectra demonstrate the specific role of the ray–dutt twist. the ta, taa, and trcd measurements show that the diastereomeric interaction limits the ray–dutt twist and therefore prolongs the lifetime of the high-spin state. these findings open up new synthetic design challenges to stabilize the high-spin state by supramolecular chemistry and solid-state approaches.the successful use of time-resolved circular dichroism to reveal structural changes in the excited state is significant because it had previously not been possible to assign the specific nature of the symmetry-breaking mode. there is a rapidly growing interest in the photophysics of earth-abundant metal complexes with the prospect of replacing ruthenium-based complexes for more sustainable materials in applications in lighting, solar capture, and photocatalysis. now, oppermann and colleagues provide a textbook example of how technical methodological advances coupled with well-chosen systems for study can further advance insights into inorganic photophysics and photochemistry.mccusker, j. k. acc. chem. res. 36, 876–887 (2003).cas article google scholar auböck, g. & chergui, m. nat. chem. 7, 629–633 (2015).article google scholar chergui, m. & collet, e. chem. rev. 117, 11025–11065 (2017).cas article google scholar gaffney, k. j. chem. sci. 12, 8010–8025 (2021).cas article google scholar oppermann, m., zinna, f., lacour, j. & chergui, m. nat. chem. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00933-0 (2022).article pubmed google scholar oppermann, m. et al. optica 6, 56–60 (2019).cas article google scholar purcell, k. f. j. am. chem. soc. 101, 5147–5152 (1979).cas article google scholar vanquickenborne, l. g. & pierloot, k. inorg. chem. 20, 3673–3677 (1981).cas article google scholar mccusker, j. k., rheingold, a. l. & hendrickson, d. n. inorg. chem. 35, 2100–2112 (1996).cas article google scholar download referenceseastchem school of chemistry, university of edinburgh, david brewster road, edinburgh, ukj. olof johanssonyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to j. olof johansson.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjohansson, j.o. plot twist in the iron spin saga. nat. chem. 14, 722–723 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00986-1download citationpublished: 01 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-022-00986-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 