intrinsically disordered regions are a ubiquitous class of protein domains that lack a fixed 3d structure. here, an evolutionarily conserved family of disordered co2 sensors has been discovered, expanding the growing repertoire of disordered regions that respond to changes in the cellular environment.you have full access to this article via your institution.cells depend on being responsive to some perturbations while robust to others, and high-fidelity environmental sensing is crucial for cells to understand their current context and act appropriately. cells use various molecular approaches to detect extra- and intracellular stimuli. intriguingly, in many cases, intrinsically disordered regions (idrs) seem to have a role in the operation of these sensors1. in this issue of nature cell biology, zhang et al. discover an evolutionarily conserved mechanism for direct co2 sensing mediated by an idr2.idrs lack a defined 3d structure, and one consequence of this is that they can be more sensitive to changes in their solution environment than their folded counterparts1,3,4. some (but not all) idrs can influence, or even drive, the formation of biomolecular condensates via intracellular phase transitions, a process that is inherently tuned by the local environment5,6. therefore, either in isolation or as modules for driving or tuning phase transitions, idrs are well poised to sense and respond to changes in the cellular environment.responding to variable co2 levels is a critical feature for almost all organisms. an earlier genetic screen had identified the candida albicans protein ptc2 as an essential component for co2 sensing7. ptc2 is a member of the evolutionarily conserved pp2c family of phosphatases, a large family conserved across the kingdoms of life. unexpectedly, using live-cell imaging, zhang et al. found that ptc2 forms biomolecular condensates in response to elevated co2 (fig. 1) to demonstrate that this was a direct effect, the authors expressed and purified ptc2, and found that reversible biomolecular condensates with liquid-like properties form in a co2-dependent manner in vitro. co2 is in equilibrium with bicarbonate and protons, yet sodium bicarbonate is unable to drive condensate formation, excluding a secondary effect through bicarbonate ions. notably, phosphatase activity is markedly enhanced upon phase separation. in summary, co2 promotes the formation of membraneless compartments with enhanced catalytic activity of ptc2 in vitro.the intrinsically disordered region (idr) of the phosphatase ptc2 drives phase separation in the presence of co2.is the formation of ptc2 condensates a specific effect, or something more generic? the dissolution of co2 could in principle reduce the surface tension of water, making it easier for any condensates to form. to rule out this nonspecific effect, the authors expressed and purified other, previously studied idrs that undergo phase separation, and showed that their phase separation is unresponsive to co2. together, all evidence suggests that ptc2 encodes a previously uncharacterized biological mechanism to sense co2 directly.what makes ptc2 special compared to other pp2c phosphatases? although several different pp2c phosphatases exist in c. albicans, ptc2 is unique in possessing a large c-terminal idr. zhang et al.2 found that deletion of this idr abrogates co2 sensing in cells and in vitro. through specific point mutations, the authors tested the importance of different idr sequence features for phase separation. these features included the polar-residue-rich prion-like domain and a negatively charged subregion. by asking how these sequence changes altered the ability to form condensates in response to co2, the authors discovered a short serine/threonine-rich subregion in the idr that is crucial for co2 sensing both in vivo and in vitro. the authors speculate that a direct interaction between polar hydroxyl groups in serine and threonine side chains and polar co2 molecules may underlie the mechanism of co2 sensing, although this molecular model for co2 sensing remains untested.beyond simply characterizing this novel co2 sensing mechanism, zhang et al.2 offer a compelling demonstration of molecular function in cellular decision-making. c. albicans undergoes a phenotypic switching step during mating known as white–opaque (w/o) switching, a process that can be tuned by co2 levels. using a combination of sequence analysis, molecular biology, and in vivo experiments, the authors show that ptc2 mediates co2-dependent stabilization of the opaque state by dephosphorylating the master transcriptional regulator wor1. overall, the current study uncovers a molecular circuit that starts with co2 and ends with transcriptional control, with disordered regions having central roles at every step.finally, an important question is that of generality: is this molecular machinery unique to c. albicans, or is it something that exists more broadly in other organisms? remarkably, zhang et al.2 found that in both fungi (saccharomyces cerevisiae and cryptococcus neoformans) and plants (arabidopsis thaliana), the idr-dependent co2 sensor is conserved across functionally orthologous pp2c-family phosphatases. using in vitro reconstitution, they showed that the ability to form co2-sensitive, liquid-like condensates is conserved, as is the enhanced phosphatase activity upon condensate formation. despite this functional conservation, the primary sequence of the ptc2 idr varies substantially between species. these results mirror previous work showing that chemical properties enable retention of molecular function in idrs despite what might naively appear to be a ‘lack’ of sequence conservation8. the authors have now uncovered a conserved and functionally crucial molecular sensor of co2 driven by a large disordered region.although idrs lack a fixed 3d structure, they engage in many essential cellular functions3. the sequence-dependent sensitivity to changes in temperature, ph, osmolytes and crowding encoded by idrs makes them an attractive and tunable component for molecular sensors and actuators, both in natural proteins and for synthetic applications1,4,6,9,10. as observed previously, even functionally conserved idrs may experience large-scale sequence variation. in the context of environmental sensors, this sequence plasticity may further enable adaptation of idrs to specific geographical or ecological niches over rapid evolutionary timescales. as such, we suggest that beyond just being biophysically poised for environmental sensing, idrs offer a means for rapid cellular adaptation. despite its insensitivity to some mutations, the authors found that the ptc2 co2 sensing is abrogated by systematic serine-to-alanine mutations. notably, this serine enrichment is conserved across orthologous proteins. together, zhang et al.2 provide a remarkable example of how the evolutionary landscape of idrs can be both adaptable and finely tuned, despite notable robustness with respect to what might at first glance appear to reflect massive sequence variation11.this current study reports that ptc2 undergoes phase separation in vitro and forms biomolecular condensates in vivo, with both processes being dependent on the c-terminal idr and sensitive to co2. the most parsimonious explanation for these observations is that ptc2 condensates form through the same set of multivalent interactions in vitro and in vivo. despite substantial progress in understanding the physical chemistry that underlies the formation of biomolecular condensates, the biological function of some phase-separated condensates is less clear5. leveraging the physics of phase separation to encode a hypersensitive molecular sensor is one instance in which a bona fide phase transition offers an appealing model for cellular function12. a first-order phase transition has the feature of being infinitely cooperative — the transition into a two-phase regime from a one-phase regime effectively behaves as an environmentally responsive switch. given that co2 seems to tune the concentration at which ptc2 condensates form, this system would appear — at least in principle — to be an elegant demonstration of how phase separation could encode a specific class of cellular function.although this study provides multiscale insight into how idrs can mediate functionally important environmental sensing, many exciting questions remain unanswered. for one, the actual molecular basis for co2 sensing remains unclear. if a direct interaction does indeed occur between co2 and hydroxyl groups on serine and threonine residues, then the molecular basis for specificity remains opaque. there are many serine- and threonine-rich idrs (including ones tested in this study) — why are those not co2 responsive? furthermore, the biological basis of how condensate formation drives downstream signaling remains elusive. as wor1 can form transcriptional condensates13, one tantalizing possibility is that the appearance of ptc2 condensates leads to the recruitment and subsequent dephosphorylation of wor1 in a ‘competing condensates’ model. hypothetically, such a model could operate such that co2-dependent ptc2 condensates form and recruit components away from wor1 condensates, driving dephosphorylation and attenuating transcriptional control. alternatively, ptc2 condensates may simply enhance the catalytic efficiency of dephosphorylation through concentration and organization of molecules and/or the creation of a local chemical environment that further favours dephosphorylation chemistry14. if this process becomes better understood, could synthetic co2 sensors be designed based on the underlying physical rules uncovered here, and could sensors for other compounds or gasses be created using similar principles? although many questions remain, addressing those questions across fungi and plants opens the door to a wide-ranging set of investigations into comparative functional biology.cuevas-velazquez, c. l. et al. nat. commun. 12, 5438 (2021).cas article google scholar zhang, m. et al. nat. cell biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00936-6 (2022).article pubmed pubmed central google scholar van der lee, r. et al. chem. rev. 114, 6589–6631 (2014).article google scholar moses, d. et al. j. phys. chem. lett. 11, 10131–10136 (2020).cas article google scholar martin, e. w. & holehouse, a. s. emerg. top. life sci. 4, 307–329 (2020).cas article google scholar ruff, k. m., roberts, s., chilkoti, a. & pappu, r. v. j. mol. biol. 430, 4619–4635 (2018).cas article google scholar lu, y., su, c., ray, s., yuan, y. & liu, h. mbio 10, e02320–18 (2019).cas pubmed pubmed central google scholar zarin, t. et al. elife 8, e46883 (2019).article google scholar zhu, p., lister, c. & dean, c. nature 599, 657–661 (2021).cas article google scholar riback, j. a. et al. cell 168, 1028–1040.e19 (2017).cas article google scholar langstein-skora, i. et al. preprint at biorxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.10.480018 (2022).yoo, h., triandafillou, c. & drummond, d. a. j. biol. chem. 294, 7151–7159 (2019).cas article google scholar frazer, c. et al. nat. microbiol. 5, 1374–1389 (2020).cas article google scholar peeples, w. & rosen, m. k. nat. chem. biol. 17, 693–702 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of biochemistry and molecular biophysics, washington university school of medicine, st. louis, mo, usaryan j. emenecker & alex s. holehousecenter for science and engineering living systems (csels), washington university, st. louis, mo, usaryan j. emenecker & alex s. holehouseyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to alex s. holehouse.a.s.h. is a scientific consultant with dewpoint therapeutics. r.j.e. has no competing interests.reprints and permissionsemenecker, r.j., holehouse, a.s. intrinsically disordered co2 sensors. nat cell biol 24, 1013–1014 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00957-1download citationpublished: 05 july 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00957-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 