enteric salmonella not only activates the ilc3–il-22 axis upon infection to provide a competitive advantage over resident microbiota but also invades ilc3s and induces inflammatory cell death, thus limiting infection.you have full access to this article via your institution.group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ilc3s) are the primary source of interleukin-22 (il-22), an essential cytokine for innate antimicrobial responses in the gut. salmonella can exploit the il-22 pathway to enhance infection. writing in nature microbiology1, xiong et al. report that salmonella infects ilc3s at later stages of the infection, which induces pyroptosis and controls bacterial infection.the gastrointestinal tract is a major barrier surface of the mammalian body in direct contact with the environment and our diet, making it a regular point of pathogen entry and colonization. this organ system is densely colonized with complex networks of mucosal immune cells that are tasked with protecting the gastrointestinal tract from pathogens, while simultaneously remaining tolerant to innocuous dietary antigens and trillions of normally beneficial microbes, termed the microbiota2. ilcs are a recently appreciated family of tissue-resident lymphocytes that critically orchestrate appropriate mucosal immunity3. ilcs lack rearranged antigen-specific receptors, are activated by factors induced by the microbiota and respond via tissue-protective cytokines. like cd4+ t helper cells, ilcs are broadly classified based on conserved transcription factors and effector cytokines, including ilc1, ilc2 and ilc3. in the gastrointestinal tract, ilc3s are the primary innate source of il-22, a pleiotropic cytokine that acts on the epithelium to promote intestinal tissue homeostasis, mucin secretion and antimicrobial responses4. this il-22 pathway is essential for optimal immunity to many enteric pathogens, such as rotavirus and citrobacter rodentium, but paradoxically is exploited by salmonella to enhance infection4,5. in this latter context, il-22 supports infection by driving epithelial production of ion chelators, which reduces the competition between resident microbiota and salmonella due to the ability of this pathogen to overcome these iron-starvation pathways5. despite the surprising findings on the role of il-22 in supporting salmonella infection, the fate and function of ilc3s following encounter with this enteric pathogen was yet to be clearly delineated.xiong et al.1 describe the intestinal ilc response to salmonella infection. characteristic of a type-1 immune response, interferon-γ (ifnγ)-producing natural killer cells and ilc1s accumulate in the salmonella-infected intestine to control the pathogen. similarly, early in the infection course, il-22+ ilc3 responses are enhanced. the authors determine that this occurs following myeloid differentiation factor 88 (myd88)- and toll-like receptor 5 (tlr5)-dependent sensing of salmonella flagellin by cd11c+ antigen-presenting cells and subsequent production of il-23, a major upstream activator of the ilc3–il-22 axis in the gut. while il-22 is generally a major driver of antimicrobial responses in the intestine, salmonella appears to exploit this pathway to support its survival and growth, as mice lacking ilc3s or ilc3-derived il-22 exhibit lower pathogen burdens and delayed mortality to infection. this probably occurs due to il-22-mediated induction of iron chelators in the intestinal microenvironment that salmonella, but not the resident microbiota, has adapted to persist within, thus reducing intermicrobial competition as previously described4. strikingly, the authors sequenced ilc3s in this context and found that the induction of il-22 is accompanied by the upregulation of genes implicated in pyroptotic cell death, such as casp1, gsdmd and nlrc5. pyroptosis, an inflammatory form of cell death, is dependent on caspase-1 inflammasome activation, il-1β and il-18 processing, and subsequent release by gasdermin d-mediated membrane pores6. the authors determined that salmonella can directly infect ilc3s to trigger cell death, characterized by higher levels of active caspase 1, and can be rescued using disulfiram, an inhibitor of gasdermin d-mediated pore formation7. the authors next explored the consequences of this salmonella-dependent induction of pyroptosis by generating mice with caspase-1-deficient ilc3s and found that this resulted in an elevated ilc3–il-22 response, ultimately supporting higher pathogen burdens and increased mortality.this elegant study identifies a biphasic ilc3 response to salmonella infection whereby in early stages there is initial activation of il-22-dependent mucosal immunity that provides a competitive advantage to the pathogen (fig. 1a). however, in later stages, direct infection of ilc3s results in pyroptosis, probably representing a host mechanism to subvert pathogen exploitation of mucosal immunity (fig. 1b). this raises additional questions that will be important to investigate in the future. for example, what signals drive the upregulation of the inflammasome components in ilc3s, or whether ilc3 pyroptosis could ultimately increase susceptibility to microbiota dysbiosis or secondary enteric pathogens that are responsive to il-22-dependent antimicrobials.a, upon enteric salmonella infection, cd11c+ antigen presenting cells (cd11c+ apc) sense flagellin from the pathogen in a myd88- and tlr5-dependent manner, produce il-23 and subsequently activate an ilc3–il-22 axis that enhances infection by reducing competition with the microbiota. b, in later stages, salmonella directly infects ilc3s, resulting in pyroptosis via activated caspase 1 and gasdermin d, thus limiting il-22-dependent support of pathogen colonization.salmonella infections are controlled and eradicated by type-1 immune responses involving ifnγ-producing ilc1, natural killer and t helper 1 cells8. while the authors employed a lethal model of salmonella infection, it remains unclear whether non-lethal conditions might have a different outcome for ilc3 pyroptosis. ilc3s also produce other effector molecules, such as granulocyte macrophage colony stimulatory factor (gm-csf), il-17 and ifnγ, and it remains possible that these factors could contribute to immunity or tissue inflammation in this model. the study by xiong et al. also highlights our limited understanding of the ilc3 life cycle. in the human fetal intestine, ilc3s can comprise up to 30% of the haematopoietic compartment9. this frequency is substantially lower in the adult intestine, presumably due to development and maturation of the adaptive immune system or other tissue-resident lymphocytes. the causes and consequences of these ilc3 population dynamics remain unclear, but the report by xiong and colleagues indicates that this could result from frequent enteric infections that occur during this developmental period.finally, over the past decade, extensive research has revealed that ilc3s play critical roles in promoting gut health, particularly in orchestrating tolerogenic interactions with the microbiota via il-2, il-22, gm-csf and antigen presentation3. ilc3s are further reduced in the inflamed tissue of patients with inflammatory bowel disease, following chronic hiv infection, or in the context of colorectal cancer, and this is predicted to exacerbate these diseases by driving microbiota-dependent inflammation, increasing susceptibility to infections and causing resistance to immunotherapy3. the study by xiong and colleagues suggests that ilc3 pyroptosis during enteric infection is an axis that will be important to consider in these contexts.xiong, l. et al. nat. microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01142-8 (2022).kayama, h., okumura, r. & takeda, k. annu. rev. immunol. 38, 23–48 (2020).cas article google scholar diefenbach, a., gnafakis, s. & shomrat, o. immunity 52, 452–463 (2020).cas article google scholar keir, m., yi, y., lu, t. & ghilardi, n. j. exp. med. 217, e20192195 (2020).article google scholar behnsen, j. et al. immunity 40, 262–273 (2014).cas article google scholar kesavardhana, s., malireddi, r. k. s. & kanneganti, t. d. annu. rev. immunol. 38, 567–595 (2020).cas article google scholar hu, j. j. et al. nat. immunol. 21, 736–745 (2020).cas article google scholar pham, o. h. & mcsorley, s. j. future microbiol. 10, 101–110 (2015).cas article google scholar fawkner-corbett, d. et al. cell 184, 810–826e823 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesjoan and sanford i. weill department of medicine, division of gastroenterology and hepatology, weill cornell medicine, cornell university, new york, ny, usaann m. joseph & gregory f. sonnenbergdepartment of microbiology and immunology, weill cornell medicine, cornell university, new york, ny, usaann m. joseph & gregory f. sonnenbergjill roberts institute for research in inflammatory bowel disease, weill cornell medicine, cornell university, new york, ny, usaann m. joseph & gregory f. sonnenbergyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to gregory f. sonnenberg.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjoseph, a.m., sonnenberg, g.f. ilc3 pyroptosis limits salmonella infection. nat microbiol 7, 933–934 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01165-1download citationpublished: 30 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-022-01165-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 