an experiment in secondary forests in the democratic republic of the congo finds that calcium, an overlooked soil nutrient, is scarcer than phosphorus, and represents a potentially greater limitation on tropical forest growth.you have full access to this article via your institution.ecology can reveal distributional patterns and dynamics in nature. one approach used is studying the elemental composition of plants, which has been linked to ecological processes such as growth, diversity or water use efficiency. more recently, elemental composition has been detected as a cofactor in governing the carbon sink capacity of plants, and therefore climate change mitigation1,2,3. this discovery has added an extra layer of urgency to the field, which now aims to better understand and predict global change. the study of nitrogen and/or phosphorus has until now received most of the attention of plant ecologists: nitrogen is the most abundant element in dry leaves after hydrogen and carbon, forms the main structure of proteins and is strongly linked to photosynthesis4. phosphorus represents around one-tenth of nitrogen abundance in leaves and is key in energy storage and nucleic acids. however, although these represent only two of the many chemical elements that are in flux throughout ecosystems, whether others may have a dominant role in ecosystem dynamics is an open question. writing in nature ecology & evolution, bauters et al.5 share some evidence to motivate broadening out from the dominant focus on nitrogen and phosphorus in terrestrial ecology, by revealing a crucial limiting role of calcium in the dynamics of tropical forest succession.if the construction of new plant tissue is compared to building a house, nitrogen represents the bricks, which are part of the structure, and phosphorus the construction workers, with the knowledge and energy to put all the bricks together. in addition, nitrogen and phosphorus have different physicochemical properties and cycles that are relevant for ecosystems. nitrogen can be acquired through biological processes such as nitrogen fixation, whereas phosphorus is derived from the decomposition of parent geological material through physical weathering processes. although nitrogen and phosphorus are linked to many physiological responses and ecological processes, assuming that they drive all ecological dynamics is perhaps too simplistic. in addition to bricks and workers, any successful construction project needs extra tools and machinery, which in plants are represented by the use of a multitude of other chemical elements (such as potassium, calcium and magnesium). this work by bauters et al.5 aims to fill our knowledge gap on whether any of these tools are as crucial for successional dynamics as are nitrogen and phosphorus.before these findings from bauters et al.5, the common paradigm was to assume that plants in tropical latitudes are primarily phosphorus-limited, given that the climate, intense biological activity and very old parental material result in soils that are depleted of rock-derived nutrients6. for secondary tropical forests, nutrient availability is likely to have a crucial role in determining the dynamics of recovery from human disturbance (such as agriculture or deforestation), the capacity for carbon sequestration, and therefore land cover changes. bauters et al.5 did not assume nitrogen or phosphorus to be fully representative of all ecosystem cations (positively charged ions) during secondary forest succession; they also considered other elements, leading to a surprising result.using a chronosequence of secondary forest plots recovering from a slash-and-burn disturbance 0, 5, 12, 20 and 60 years ago in the democratic republic of the congo, as well as nondisturbed original forest, the authors consider calcium, potassium and magnesium dynamics in addition to nitrogen and phosphorus in the plant–soil system via three different paths: (1) accounting for the nutrient community inputs through atmospheric deposition and community losses through leaching; (2) considering the dynamics of soil chemical composition across the plot chronosequence; and (3) accounting for the chemical composition and biomass of leaves, litter and fine roots along the time series. the results of all three approaches consistently point towards calcium becoming scarcer in plant biomass over time throughout successional stages, while phosphorus becomes more abundant (fig. 1). in this context, the remaining calcium in the system is mobilized from soil to wood, meaning that logging and shipping could potentially withdraw most of the calcium reserves in afrotropical landscapes, leading to ecosystem-wide calcium depletion.the low-available calcium (ca) moves from soil to wood, and is diluted along the succession when biomass increases. on the other hand, the phosphorus (p) that comes from atmospheric deposition (dep.) sustains plant phosphorus requirements, and even increases the availability of this element over time. credit: edward parker / alamy stock photo (left image); steve o. taylor / nature picture library / alamy stock photo (right image).in the case of bauters et al.’s study5, the soil chronosequence was indeed considered cation-depleted, but they were able to detect a phosphorus input from the atmosphere. this input appears to be enough to sustain the phosphorus requirements of the ecosystem, with an increase in tissue phosphorus concentration along the chronosequence due to phosphorus accumulation. however, even though calcium and phosphorus are derived from soil parental material following the same processes, such an additional source of atmospheric supply is not available for calcium. this probably explains why, in this particular tropical environment, there is higher calcium scarcity than phosphorus scarcity.bauters et al.5 demonstrate that broadening the focus of plant nutrient cycles beyond nitrogen and phosphorus to encompass more elements may allow us to better explain patterns that had previously remained elusive. the depletion of calcium stores identified in this afrotropical ecosystem could potentially be extended to other locations and other elements, perhaps revealing a key role of these elements in modulating plant growth and carbon fixation. the importance of other elements within ecosystems has previously been explored from a theoretical perspective7,8, but bauters et al.5 now bring the discussion to the field, and at large scales. incorporating other variables such as calcium on top of the others that are more systematically considered will of course add further complexity to the analysis and interpretation of future studies. nevertheless, studies such as this demonstrate that embracing this complexity will give a more complete understanding of the dynamics of plant growth in the anthropocene, allowing us to better predict the responses of ecosystems to future environmental change.piao, s. et al. nat. rev. earth environ. 1, 14–27 (2020).article google scholar chen, c. et al. sci adv. 6, eabb1981 (2020).article google scholar terrer, c. et al. nat. clim. chang. 9, 684–689 (2019).cas article google scholar kattge, j., knorr, w., raddatz, t. & wirth, c. glob. change biol. 15, 976–991 (2009).article google scholar bauters, m. et al. nat. ecol. evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01810-2 (2022).article pubmed google scholar walker, t. w. & syers, j. k. geoderma 15, 1–19 (1976).cas article google scholar sterner, r. w. & elser, j. j. ecological stoichiometry: the biology of elements from molecules to the biosphere (princeton univ. press, 2002).sardans, j. & peñuelas, j. glob. ecol. biogeogr. 24, 261–275 (2015).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of civil and environmental engineering, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma, usahelena vallicrosayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to helena vallicrosa.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsvallicrosa, h. beyond nitrogen and phosphorus. nat ecol evol 6, 1056–1057 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01788-xdownload citationpublished: 04 july 2022issue date: august 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-022-01788-xanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 