billions of people across the globe lack access to safe drinking water. now a study sheds light on the potential for sunlight-based technologies to offer reliable disinfection for rural populations, which are often the most underserved.you have full access to this article via your institution.despite progress in providing safe drinking water to communities around the world, challenges remain in supplying rural areas in low- to middle-income countries. an estimated 1.6 billion people living in rural areas do not have access to safely managed drinking water1, making rural communities more likely to rely on water sources that contain waterborne pathogens (fig. 1), which can lead to short- and long-term health impacts. many of the regions that are most in need of improvements in the quality of drinking water are also in parts of the world with the greatest sunlight exposure2, prompting interest in harnessing sunlight, a free and renewable resource, to aid in water disinfection. writing in nature sustainability, jeon and colleagues3 provide an analysis of a diverse range of sunlight-mediated technologies to evaluate opportunities for disinfecting drinking water in rural regions around the world. the technologies evaluated can be implemented for individual households right where the water is needed, and have the potential to be low cost and simple to use.amanda lardizabal.development efforts aspire to support communities’ access to safe drinking water, but over 150 million people still rely on untreated surface waters, and nearly half of rural populations lack access to safely managed water sources that are located on the premises, are available when needed and are free from faecal and priority chemical contamination.although the direct use of sunlight for water disinfection has been implemented for decades4,5,6, there is growing interest in the development of new materials and technologies that are more efficient at harnessing sunlight to enable faster and more reliable disinfection. for example, jeon and co-workers focus their analysis on five options for household- or neighbourhood-scale sunlight-driven disinfection. the first technology is photocatalysis, which uses catalysts (semiconductors) to produce short-lived radicals (such as the hydroxyl radical) to make pathogens inactive. a second approach is to use dye photosensitization, which similarly leverages an added substance (in this case, organic photosensitizers) to produce short-lived radicals (for example, singlet oxygen). capitalizing on recent advancements in ultraviolet light–emitting diodes (leds), a third approach is to use solar energy (with photovoltaics) to power devices that achieve ultraviolet disinfection. finally, two technologies using sunlight as a heating source were evaluated: evaporation and recovery (that is, distillation) of the water using a solar still, and solar pasteurization (that is, heating the water to aid disinfection).despite the abundance of sunlight in many rural areas that lack biologically safe drinking water and the apparent promise of available technologies, the true potential of solar-driven disinfection remains unclear. in part, this stems from the fact that most research so far has been conducted in the laboratory, with the aim of understanding disinfection mechanisms and material and technology performance. such work is often conducted, for example, in small lab-scale reactors, on one water type and with one target organism to inactivate. although important, such conditions do not reflect real-world complexity. in particular, there is a disconnect between idealized material properties and actual performance, and the implications of such disconnect, especially across locations and water source qualities, is unclear.to fill this gap, jeon and co-authors3 estimated the volume of water that can be disinfected each day by each treatment technology, at different latitudes and times of the year, and under a range of idealized and more realistic scenarios. across all scenarios, the authors found that solar pasteurization had the greatest capacity to treat water (that is, it yielded the greatest volume of disinfected water per unit of sunlight energy received), whereas solar distillation had the lowest capacity due to the large amount of energy needed to evaporate water.for the photocatalysis, photosensitized and solar-powered ultraviolet led systems, the authors found a large disparity in disinfection capacity between ideal and more realistic conditions. this difference stemmed largely from the gap between the expected performance under idealized conditions and the actual disinfection performance the materials used for these methods are likely to achieve in practice. jeon et al. warn that, despite ongoing research to improve the materials adopted in these three approaches to water disinfection, and despite the optimism of researchers about the potential of photocatalysts, photosensitizers and ultraviolet leds, progress towards full-scale implementation takes time, and there may be barriers (for example, material property limitations) that keep these technologies from ever achieving their maximum theoretical performance. conversely, the potential of solar pasteurization does not hinge on materials improvements. in addition, solar pasteurization may be effective across a broader range of pathogens and may be less sensitive to the quality of the water source, suggesting a stronger potential of this approach for water disinfection in rural communities.across all of the solar-driven disinfection options considered, there are a range of uncertainties. for example, treatment efficacy can be influenced by the variability in the properties and performance of the materials, by the characteristics of the local water source (for example, the presence of natural organic matter in the water) and by the sensitivity of different classes of pathogens (for example, bacteria, viruses, protozoan cysts and oocysts) to each mechanism of disinfection. the last of these, in particular, is an important issue for which there are still many unknowns. in this respect, jeon and co-authors assume that singlet oxygen is effective in virus inactivation. however, very few viruses have been experimentally evaluated, and this assumption may not hold true for all waterborne viruses that can make people sick.on the basis of the information from research studies published so far, jeon et al. conducted a sensitivity analysis and illustrated that the location and the time of year always have an important role in determining treatment capacity, given their influence on sunlight intensity, whereas the influence of other factors (such as the source water temperature or the concentration of other contaminants in the water) on uncertainty in disinfection performance varies across technologies. better characterization and standardization of the technologies can help to reduce uncertainty. however, to make recommendations for a given community, area-specific assessments that take into consideration environmental (sunlight intensity, temperatures, and so on) and socio-economic factors (feasibility, cost, community trust, and so on) to understand the trade-offs across disinfection technologies will be needed.given the urgency of providing safe drinking water to rural communities not served by centralized treatment systems, the analysis by jeon and colleagues3 represents a substantive step towards a realistic assessment of the disinfection potential of deploying sunlight-mediated point-of-use drinking water treatment. however, there remains work to be done for the successful implementation of these types of technology, particularly in resource-constrained settings. although the authors assessed the disinfection capacity of each treatment technology, additional research is needed on the technical, logistical and socio-economic challenges of technology implementation. for example, photocatalyst- and photosensitizer-based technologies require the immobilization of catalysts and sensitizers, and immobilization has its own challenges related to mass transfer that can preclude the mixing of produced radicals into the bulk solution at high enough concentrations to achieve meaningful disinfection7. cost considerations and maintenance must also be considered, especially in the case of point-of-use technologies, whereby each household is responsible for the upkeep of their own unit.even with these open questions, the work of jeon et al3. provides insight into which sunlight-driven technologies may be effective at providing safe drinking water to rural communities. ultimately, this insight can be used to help prioritize efforts to work with communities to evaluate, develop and deploy disinfection technologies and to guide investments in research and development to make disinfection more effective and accessible to rural communities.progress on drinking water, sanitation and hygiene: 2017 update and sdg baselines (who and unicef, 2017).chu, c., ryberg, e. c., loeb, s. k., suh, m.-j. & kim, j.-h. acc. chem. res. 52, 1187–1195 (2019).cas article google scholar jeon, i., ryberg, e. c., alvarez, p. j. j. & kim, j.-h. nat. sustain. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00915-7 (2022).article google scholar curtis, t. p., mara, d. d. & silva, s. a. appl. environ. microbiol. 58, 1335–1343 (1992).cas article google scholar mcguigan, k. g. et al. j. hazard. mater. 235–236, 29–46 (2012).article google scholar nelson, k. l. et al. environ. sci. processes impacts 20, 1089–1122 (2018).cas article google scholar ray, a. k. chem. eng. sci. 54, 3113–3125 (1999).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of civil and urban engineering, tandon school of engineering, new york university, new york, ny, usaandrea i. silvermandepartment of civil and environmental engineering, grainger college of engineering, university of illinois urbana-champaign, urbana, il, usajeremy s. guestyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to andrea i. silverman or jeremy s. guest.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionssilverman, a.i., guest, j.s. cleaner water with light. nat sustain (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00926-4download citationpublished: 30 june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-022-00926-4anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 