in caenorhabditis elegans, rnai-initiated gene silencing can persist for multiple generations. a study shows that this heritable silencing requires parallel contributions of both a nuclear transcriptional silencing pathway and perinuclear condensate-localized poly(ug)-tailed transcripts to produce abundant germline sirnas in adult progeny.you have full access to this article via your institution.watson and crick’s dna double-helix model1, experimentally validated by the famous meselson and stahl experiment2, provided a molecular explanation for how dna reproduces and transmits heritable information between generations. experiments and observations in c. elegans show that rna can also transmit information between generations3,4. this information is gene silencing by rna interference (rnai), which can persist without selection for 4–8 generations5. key participants include rna-directed rna polymerases (rdrps) and argonaute proteins, which synthesize and use short interfering rna (sirna) as antisense guide sequences to direct silencing complexes to target transcripts and perinuclear nucleoprotein condensates called nuages. the targeted transcripts are also used as templates to produce additional secondary sirna, greatly amplifying the silencing effect and enabling robust heritable rnai. it is likely that both the sirna and rdrp substrate are required to transmit heritable silencing information between generations. in this regard, nuages may serve as sites for production and storage (transmission) of heritable rnai signals. as reported in this issue of nature cell biology, ouyang et al.6 used in situ hybridization to follow the spatial and temporal fate of rnai-targeted transcripts in treated parents and their offspring. analysis of wild-type and mutant animals lacking nuclear or nuage-specific rnai factors reveals that the rnai activities associated with these two compartments act in parallel to maintain effective heritable rnai.heritable rnai requires first establishing a germline rnai response in the animal directly exposed to double-stranded rna (dsrna), followed by the transmission of heritable silencing signals to the progeny, which then act to maintain silencing in that and subsequent generations. to establish germline rnai, ouyang et al. fed to worms bacteria expressing dsrna targeting the germline-expressed gene mex-6. the mex-6 gene is an ideal reporter rna for rnai studies, as its function is redundant with mex-5, and thus its knockdown does not result in a phenotype. the ingested mex-6 dsrna is transported to the germline, where it is processed into primary sirnas that associate with the primary argonaute rde-1. using the sirna as a guide, the rde-1 protein complex recognizes and cleaves mex-6 transcripts. a terminal transferase adds alternating uracil (u) and guanidine (g) nucleotides to the new 3′ end, producing poly(ug)-tailed (pugylated) transcripts7 that are substrates for rdrp production of abundant mex-6 complementary secondary sirnas. these amplified secondary sirnas associate with secondary cytoplasmic and nuclear argonaute proteins to mediate effective gene silencing. the cytoplasmic secondary argonautes target and destabilize cytoplasmic mex-6 mrna by an unknown mechanism that does not appear to lead to pugylation and further rounds of sirna amplification7,8. by contrast, the nuclear argonaute hrde-1 uses the secondary sirnas to bind nascent mex-6 transcripts, pause the associated rna polymerase and recruit chromatin-modifying factors to transcriptionally silence the mex-6 locus4. this nuclear rnai pathway produces, via an additional round of rdrp activity, tertiary sirnas important for heritable rnai9. also important for heritable rnai is the helicase-domain zinc-finger protein znfx-1, which localizes to and interacts with perinuclear nuage components10,11. poly(ug)-tailed transcripts also localize to these nuages7.to investigate how hrde-1 and znfx-1 contribute to heritable rnai, ouyang et al.6 used single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smfish) to measure changes in the abundance of the mex-6 transcript in germline and oocyte subcellular compartments in wild-type and mutant parental (p0) animals exposed to dsrna and their non-exposed f1 progeny. fish provides a direct window to rnai efficacy that is not encumbered by protein stability as well as revealing the location and abundance of transcript-derived rnai products and templates. mex-6 transcripts are readily detected in meiotic nuclei (often a pair of dots corresponding to the mex-6 loci), in perinuclear nuages, and broadly throughout the syncytial germline and oocyte cytoplasm (fig. 1). animals exposed to mex-6 dsrna show a rapid decrease in cytoplasmic transcripts in both the syncytial germline and maturing oocytes that persists in non-exposed f1 and f2 progeny. the authors also observed a transient increase in the intensity of nuclear transcripts in p0 animals, likely indicating slowed mrna processing and/or export and increased numbers and intensities of nuage-associated transcripts. the nuclear and nuage signals were reduced in the f1 progeny, likely reflecting reduced transcription associated with silenced chromatin. repeating this analysis in mutants revealed that hrde-1 is required for the transient increase in the p0 nuclear signal and the subsequent decrease in the f1 nuclear signal. hrde-1 is also required for about half of the reduced cytoplasmic signal in both the germline and oocyte. by contrast, znfx-1 is required for nuage signal in both untreated and treated p0 and f1 animals. znfx-1 is also required for about half of the reduced cytoplasmic signal in both the germline and oocyte. in double mutants there is no increase or decrease in the nuclear signal, no accumulation of nuage signal, and no decrease in cytoplasmic signal. these observations indicate that hrde-1 and znfx-1 act in concert to initiate rnai in the dsrna-exposed adult and set in motion hrde-1- and znfx-1-dependent rnai processes that persist in the progeny.single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smfish) detects mex-6 transcripts (red dots) in germline and oocyte cytoplasm, in germline perinuclear nuages (grey), and nascent transcripts at the mex-6 locus (two larger red dots in the nucleus). the red bar indicates the cytosolic mex-6 signals, and the green and purple boxes indicate hrde-1- and znfx-1-mediated elimination of cytosolic mex-6 signals. parental (p0) exposure to mex-6 dsrna causes a transient hrde-1-dependent increase in nascent transcripts, a znfx-1-dependent increase in nuage signal, and equal contributions of hrde-1 and znfx-1 to the reduction in cytoplasmic mex-6 transcript levels. in p0 oocytes, a znfx-1-dependent nuage signal is readily detected and, again, hrde-1 and znfx-1 make equal contributions to the reduction in cytoplasmic mex-6 transcript levels. in f1 progeny, smfish detects reduced hrde-1-dependent nascent transcripts, znfx-1-dependent nuage signal, and equal contributions of hrde-1 and znfx-1 to the reduction in cytoplasmic mex-6 signals in both the germline and oocytes.small rna (srna) sequencing analysis of f1 progeny from dsrna-exposed animals showed that the vast majority of heritable rnai-associated sirnas are dependent on znfx-1 and that these sirnas largely correspond to the region represented by the introduced dsrna. by contrast, hrde-1-dependent sirnas are much less abundant and map to the entire mex-6 transcript. this difference suggests independent amplification mechanisms for hrde-1- and znfx-1-dependent heritable sirnas, although sirnas are probably shared between the two pathways. the znfx-1-dependent sirnas are likely produced from pugylated mex-6 transcripts; znfx-1 and pugylated transcripts both localized to nuages, znfx-1 and pugylated mex-6 rna co-immunoprecipitated, and in znfx-1 mutants, pugylated transcripts were not detected in the f1 progeny. a feed-forward loop in which znfx-1-dependent sirnas target transcripts for cleavage and pugylation as templates for additional sirna production provides a means to maintain a large pool of sirnas for heritable rnai. the providence of hrde-1-dependent sirnas remains unknown but may involve a nuclear-localized rdrp.this work, using primarily smfish and srna-sequencing analysis, shows that introduced dsrna results in three separate rnai processes in three distinct subcellular locations that affect heritable silencing. first, transported and processed dsrna homologous to cytoplasmic mrnas is used to produce abundant secondary sirnas. these secondary sirnas act in the cytoplasm to destabilize cytoplasmic transcripts. second, these secondary sirnas also act in the nucleus to initiate transcriptional gene silencing at the target gene locus. third, nuage-localized poly(ug)-tailed transcripts are templates for sirna production in the offspring. these second and third steps are essential for heritable rnai. the spatial segregation may enable persistence of the epigenetic signals, preserving the templates for future generations.how and why heritable rnai is limited to 4–8 generations is still a mystery but may involve competition with other srna pathways12. whether the pugylated transcripts and/or hrde-1-associated sirna is the physical basis for inherited silencing information remains unresolved. perhaps use of conditional-stable proteins can identify the information transported to the embryonic germline. what is clear is that both processes are interdependent, and both are required to realize heritable rnai.the c. elegans germline is derived directly from parental germ cells, thus, transmission of epigenetic information from germline to germline is akin to transmission of epigenetic information in vegetatively growing microbial systems, such as yeast and bacteria. the key considerations are templated replication, amplification, and segregation. the template information can be altered protein structure (prions), feed-forward regulatory networks, complex organelles (centrosomes, cellular membranes), or nucleic acids, including dna and chromatin modifications, and sirnas. experimental rnai in c. elegans is a powerful model for epigenetic inheritance as scientists have control over the introduction of the heritable information and can directly monitor the activity, products, and outcome. evidence from this work not only teases apart the complex regulatory network occurring in the handoff of information from germline to germline, but also highlights the innate power of epigenetic inheritance, as environmentally available information is synthesized and transmitted from one germline to the next. the separate yet synergistic pathways, which cumulatively contribute to inherited rnai, also indicate the importance of these signals. by placing an epigenetic signal into separate baskets there can be more control over the strength, timing, and longevity of the epigenetic memory.watson, j. d. & crick, f. h. nature 171, 964–967 (1953).cas article google scholar meselson, m. & stahl, f. w. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 44, 671–682 (1958).cas article google scholar fire, a. et al. nature 391, 806–811 (1998).cas article google scholar buckley, b. a. et al. nature 489, 447–451 (2012).cas article google scholar alcazar, r. m., lin, r. & fire, a. z. genetics 180, 1275–1288 (2008).cas article google scholar ouyang, j. p. t., zhang, w. l. & seydoux, g. nat. cell biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00940-w (2022).article pubmed google scholar shukla, a. et al. nature 582, 283–288 (2020).cas article google scholar yigit, e. et al. cell 127, 747–757 (2006).cas article google scholar sapetschnig, a., sarkies, p., lehrbach, n. j. & miska, e. a. plos genet. 11, e1005078 (2015).article google scholar ishidate, t. et al. mol. cell 70, 639–649.e6 (2018).cas article google scholar wan, g. et al. nature 557, 679–683 (2018).cas article google scholar shukla, a., perales, r. & kennedy, s. curr. biol. 31, 4473–4485.e3 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesthe biological laboratories, department of molecular and cellular biology, harvard university, cambridge, ma, usanicole m. bush & craig p. hunteryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to craig p. hunter.n.m.b. and c.p.h. declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsbush, n.m., hunter, c.p. don’t put all your epigenetic eggs in one basket. nat cell biol 24, 1016–1018 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00948-2download citationpublished: 30 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-00948-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 