excitonic states with hybrid dimensionality in layered silicon diphosphide exhibit interesting features such as linearly dichroic photoluminescence and unusually strong exciton–phonon coupling.you have full access to this article via your institution.elements from group iva (such as c, si and ge) and group va (n, p, as, sb, bi) generally adopt an sp3 hybridization with tetrahedral bonding when forming solids. this gives rise to the well-known structures of diamond and semiconducting silicon and germanium. however, with an additional valence electron, group va elements typically form only three bonds and thus crystallize in structures with various dimensionality, such as puckered or buckled two-dimensional (2d) sheets1 and one-dimensional (1d) chains2 in several allotropes and compounds. the formation of 1d chains of group va elements on the surfaces of bulk group iva semiconductors has been known for more than three decades3, but their properties have been largely eclipsed by the behaviour of the bulk substrate. interestingly, layered group iva–va compounds such as silicon diphosphide (sip2; ref. 4) with quasi-1d phosphorus chains embedded in uneven quasi-2d layers have recently attracted attention5,6,7,8. the hybrid-dimensional nature of sip2 makes it an emerging platform hosting exotic physical properties. now, writing in nature materials, ling zhou and colleagues report on the observation of hybrid bright excitons in exfoliated sip2 formed by electrons largely confined in 1d phosphorus chains and holes delocalized in 2d layers9.in this work, the authors used exfoliated flakes of sip2 synthesized by the sn flux method7, which they characterized using scanning transmission electron microscopy. they then carried out optical characterization at cryogenic temperatures (5.5 k) to minimize thermal broadening and probe the sip2 crystals’ intrinsic behaviour. using photoluminescence and reflection contrast spectroscopy measurements, zhou and colleagues identified a main spectral feature at 2.06 ev and a sideband at 2.01 ev, which they attributed to an excitonic state with hybrid dimensionality and its phonon sideband (labelled a and aʹ, respectively).most importantly, zhou and colleagues complemented the experimental observations with detailed ab initio many-body quantum calculations to convincingly attribute the spectral features to the corresponding 1d electrons and their bound 2d holes. by solving the bethe–salpeter equation, which describes the behaviour of bound states such as excitons, the absorption spectrum of sip2 was accurately computed and compared to the experimental photoluminescence and reflectance spectra. this allowed the researchers to pinpoint the electron and hole states forming the observed unusual exciton, and thus reveal the nature of their single particle wavefunctions. their analysis showed that the exciton is formed from electron states that are predominantly spatially confined within the 1d chains of p–p bonds, while the contributing hole states extend over the layers in a quasi-2d fashion and show around ten times less anisotropy in their in-chain/inter-chain hopping ability, confirming the hybrid dimensionality of the excitons (as depicted approximately in fig. 1a). fig. 1b illustrates the schematics of the hybrid exciton and the band structures of bulk sip2.a, approximate density of 2d hole states in sip2 layers and 1d electron states in the embedded phosphorus chains (illustrated by the red ovals and blue rods, respectively). pa and pb indicate phosphorus atoms at two different lattice positions. b, band structure and the formation schematic of the hybrid-dimensional bright exciton in sip2. figure adapted with permission from ref. 9, springer nature ltd.zhou and colleagues further report linearly dichroic photoluminescence where, regardless of the polarization of the excitation light, emission was always linearly polarized and perpendicular to the 1d phosphorus chains.supported by many-body ab initio calculations, the authors attribute the emergence of the aʹ sideband to the coupling of excitons with phonons — quasiparticles originating from the quantized vibrations in solids. interestingly, the large intensity of the aʹ sideband, and the notable redshift of the a and aʹ excitons with increasing temperature, are indicative of an unusually strong coupling between phonons and the hybrid excitons in sip2. these features make layered silicon diphosphide an interesting platform to further study and understand exciton–phonon coupling in low-dimensional materials.going forward, zhou and colleagues’ work highlights many opportunities and scientific questions that need to be addressed. these observations will certainly stimulate experimental and theoretical investigations to fully reveal the nature of hybrid-dimensional excitons and harness the opportunities that arise when playing with these unconventional excitonic states in more complex systems. for instance, electrostatic gating can be used to tune the exciton and investigate possible positively and negatively charged trions in the hybrid-dimensional states. while zhou and colleagues studied flakes with thicknesses down to around 7 nm, it was recently demonstrated that monolayers of sip2 can be produced by mechanical exfoliation8. this provides the opportunity not only to fully remove the third dimension to study the hybrid 1d–2d excitons, but also to combine sip2 with other 2d materials in van der waals heterostructures. such structures may host interesting interlayer excitons including moiré excitons10 with mixed dimensionalities.on the other hand, sip2 is an indirect bandgap material regardless of its thickness, and the unusual exciton is located a few tens of millielectron volts away from the conduction band minimum and valence band maximum. this naturally raises the question of whether sip2 can be turned into a direct bandgap material with minimal effort (through strain engineering or alloying, for instance) to fully harness the potential of the hybrid exciton in optoelectronic devices. in fact, zhou and colleagues have already demonstrated that growing sipxas2-x alloys leads to the site-specific substitution of arsenic in the 1d phosphorus chains, which can be regarded as a new degree of freedom to tune the band structure and potentially the dimensionality of relevant states. the results by zhou and colleagues therefore reveal a bright picture for the future of excitons with hybrid dimensionalities.hultgren, r., gingrich, n. s. & warren, b. e. j. chem. phys. 3, 351–355 (1935).cas article google scholar ruck, m. et al. angew. chem. int. ed. 44, 7616–7619 (2005).cas article google scholar van silfhout, r. g. et al. surf. sci. 271, 32–44 (1992).article google scholar wadsten, t. acta chem. scand. 21, 593 (1967).cas article google scholar wang, f. q., guo, y., wang, q., kawazoe, y. & jena, p. chem. mater. 29, 9300–9307 (2017).cas article google scholar li, l. et al. adv. mater. 30, 1804541 (2018).article google scholar zhang, x., wang, s., ruan, h., zhang, g. & tao, x. solid state sci. 37, 1–5 (2014).article google scholar wang, z. et al. acs nano 15, 20442–20452 (2021).cas article google scholar zhou, l. et al. nat. mater. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01285-3 (2022).article google scholar huang, d., choi, j., shih, c.-k. & li, x. nat. nanotechnol. 17, 227–238 (2022).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of electrical engineering, yale university, new haven, ct, usamatthieu fortin-deschênes & fengnian xiayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to matthieu fortin-deschênes or fengnian xia.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfortin-deschênes, m., xia, f. a tale of two dimensionalities. nat. mater. 21, 735–736 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01306-1download citationpublished: 29 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01306-1anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 