the world’s poorest households, who often depend on agricultural incomes, are increasingly vulnerable to weather-induced shocks. a recent study shows how anti-poverty programmes can help to protect both consumption and income when exposed to shocks.you have full access to this article via your institution.agriculture is risky, and the vast majority of the world’s poorest households living in extreme poverty earn their living from agriculture. year after year, these households are vulnerable to weather and climate shocks that can suddenly destroy annual household income. when shocks happen, as they inevitably do, poor households faced with weather-induced income shocks usually have limited options for coping. they often must choose between selling assets or making deep cuts to basic family consumption1,2. either choice can have serious long-term economic consequences. a recent paper3 by karen macours and co-authors published in the economic journal explores whether a cash transfer combined with either a productive investment grant or vocational training can help vulnerable households protect both consumption and income when exposed to weather shocks. in other words, they examine whether ex ante investments in either skills or capital increase household resilience to weather-related income shocks.improving resilience is particularly important because not only do poor rural households have limited options for coping, they also have limited tools for risk management. the risk of future shocks can keep people poor by discouraging investment in assets and activities that would, on average, improve incomes. instead, evidence suggests that households invest in lower-risk activities offering lower returns4. recent innovations in agricultural insurance utilizing low-cost, high-resolution satellite-based vegetation and rainfall data are promising, but demand has been consistently low5 and product quality is highly variable6. alternatively, households may choose to diversify income through planting multiple crops, or by allocating labour to other non-agricultural activities7.opportunities for diversifying income can be limited by capital constraints and technical skills. the programme studied by macours and co-authors seeks to alleviate those constraints. the intervention targeted rural agricultural households and provided a conditional cash transfer in randomly assigned communities in rural nicaragua. cash transfers have been shown to improve both consumption and investment8, as well as a host of other outcomes. for a subset of beneficiaries, the cash transfer was supplemented with either a productive investment grant or free vocational training. access to the supplemental programmes was randomly assigned during a public lottery, so that programme impacts can be easily assessed by comparing outcomes across the different types of beneficiary. recent studies have shown that beneficiaries of multifaceted programmes that combine cash transfers with trainings and large asset transfers have higher consumption, greater food security, improved mental health, a larger asset base, and increased income and savings9. less is known about their effects on resilience in the wake of shocks.given the importance of income diversification as a risk management strategy, the first question the authors ask is whether the programme changed the revenue sources of households. first, the authors show that the basic cash transfer programme had no effect on non-agricultural wage labour participation, although it increased the probability of participating in non-agricultural entrepreneurial activities by 4 percentage points. nonetheless, total income remained fairly constant. like the basic cash transfer, the vocational training modestly diversifies income by increasing the probability of an individual participating in non-agricultural entrepreneurship, although the effect is not different from that of the basic cash transfer. unlike the basic cash transfer programme, vocational training also helped to boost wage income. vocational training participants earned on average about us$60 more annually from wage labour. this effect seems to be driven by changing jobs rather than entering into wage-based employment. in contrast, beneficiaries of the productive investment grant were 13 percentage points more likely to pursue non-agricultural self-employment than the control, and as a result they also earned about us$60 more annually from their non-agricultural activities. in this way, the productive investment grant seems to successfully increase income by an amount similar to the vocational training programme, but with income earned from greater entrepreneurial activities, rather than higher wages.a more diversified income base can hypothetically help agricultural households to ‘weather’ climate-related shocks. to see if that happened in nicaragua, the authors utilize rainfall and temperature data combined with self-reported shock exposure and agricultural yield data to see if the programmes help households protect consumption and income in the wake of a weather-induced income shock. the many microclimates of nicaragua provide seemingly random variation in shock exposure, which the authors use to assign causal effects. the productive asset grant, which helped to diversify income the most, increases income by 4% and consumption by 8%, regardless of shock exposure. in contrast, the vocational training — which also diversified income but to a smaller extent — effectively increased income by 9% and consumption by 7%, but only when weather shocks were experienced. these impacts are concentrated among households with less-diversified income portfolios at baseline, suggesting that income diversification is the mechanism for enhanced resilience.ending global poverty and stabilizing climate change are two of the most important global challenges of our time. moreover, because agriculture depends directly on climate, climate risk and poverty are deeply connected in poor rural areas globally. risk is a pressing challenge for rural poor households, and exposure to risk often results in poverty persistence. macours and co-authors demonstrate how relaxing either skill or capital constraints can help households to become more resilient and manage climatic variability. in a world where climate change threatens to make climate risk an ever more important driver of long-run poverty, social protection programmes that increase resilience will be increasingly valuable.hoddinott, j. j. dev. stud. 42, 301–321 (2006).article google scholar carter, m. & lybbert, t. j. dev. econ. 99, 255–264 (2012).article google scholar macours, k., premand, p. & vakis, r. econ. j. https://doi.org/10.1093/ej/ueac018 (2022).elbers, c., gunning, j. & kinsey, b. world bank econ. rev. 21, 1–20 (2007).article google scholar platteau, j.-p., de bock, o. & gelade, w. world dev. 94, 139–156 (2017).article google scholar kenduiywo, b., carter, m., ghosh, a. & hijmans, r. plos one 16, e0258215 (2021).cas article google scholar rose, e. j. dev. econ. 64, 371–388 (2001).article google scholar gertler, p., martinez, s. & rubio-codina, m. am. econ. j. appl. econ. 4, 164–192 (2012).article google scholar banerjee, a. et al. science 348, 1260799 (2015).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of agricultural and consumer economics, university of illinois at urbana champaign, urbana, il, usasarah janzenyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to sarah janzen.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsjanzen, s. anti-poverty programmes build resilience. nat. clim. chang. 12, 612–613 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01408-3download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01408-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 