a graph neural network-based tool is introduced to perform unsupervised cell clustering using spatially resolved transcriptomics data that can uncover cell identities, interactions, and spatial organization in tissues and organs.you have full access to this article via your institution.the functions and gene expression profiles of cells depend on their local environment within a tissue. knowledge of relative locations of cells is therefore essential for understanding the role of different cell types in normal function and disease pathology. single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq) has made it possible to characterize cellular gene expression at single-cell resolution, but it cannot uncover the physical relationship among cells. the lack of spatial context prohibits us from investigating the complicated transcriptional architecture of heterogeneous tissues. for example, subpopulations of cancer cells can vastly differ from each other in their gene expression profiles and cellular properties, depending on the tumor microenvironment. in another example, brain tissue comprises a multitude of highly specialized neuron and glial cells within close proximity of each other. writing in nature computational science, jiachen li and colleagues1 introduce ccst (cell clustering for spatial transcriptomics), a tool that can perform unsupervised cell clustering to identify spatial domains, to discover sub cell types, and to uncover cell interactions, based on a graph neural network approach.recent technological advances in imaging- and sequencing-based spatially resolved transcriptomics (srt) technologies have enabled comprehensive gene expression profiling while retaining spatial information2,3. such information provides an integrated understanding of cells in their morphological context. studies performed with srt platforms have thus transformed our views of transcriptional complexity and generated insights into areas ranging from tumor heterogeneity to brain function. due to its profound impact, nature methods highlighted srt as the method of the year in 20204. srt technologies rely on pooled transcripts from a spot of tissue. adjacent spots are more likely to have similar transcriptomic profiles, and regions that are uniform in gene expression and histology can also be identified (fig. 1a). an important first step in the analysis of srt data is thus to cluster the spots and identify contiguous domains with fairly uniform gene expression. this is essential for downstream analyses, such as cell type or tissue annotation, spatially variable gene identification, new cell type identification, and gene ontology (go) analysis (fig. 1c). traditional clustering methods developed for scrna-seq analysis only take gene expression data as input. as a result, identified clusters may include cells in disparate locations in the tissue. new statistical and machine learning methods are needed to fully harness gene expression and spatial location information inherent in spatial transcriptomics data. graph-based models are a promising method to encode all essential information, including gene expression, spatial context and histology information from srt data to implement clustering (fig. 1a,b).a, srt data includes gene expression information for each spot, spatial coordinates for all spots, and a histology image (which is an optional input for the model). b, a graph-based model can integrate these data. to represent each node (spot), features can be extracted from all three types of information. to construct the edges, the spatial context and histology information can be used. c, unsupervised clustering is then applied after learning the graph. once spots are clustered, it is straightforward to perform visualization and spatial domain identification, and other downstream analyses.the introduced ccst tool can simultaneously process gene expression and complex global spatial information of single cells from the srt data in order to recover spatial context. departing from typical spatial clustering approaches, ccst does not assume that cells from the same group are always spatially close to each other, and instead, takes into account cell properties across the entire tissue sample. an essential step in the ccst approach was the incorporation of deep learning methods, specifically graph convolutional neural networks (gcn). gcns are optimized for handling non-euclidean relationships in data, encoded as a graph. each node of the graph represents a spot defined by a gene expression profile. the edges of the graph represent the neighborhood relationships between cells. the ccst neural network includes multiple layers, and was trained to encode cell embedding from spatial gene expression data in an unsupervised manner (meaning, without the need of pre-identified labels). once trained, it can then be used for cell clustering on various samples. to date, the lack of ‘gold standard’ annotations for existing srt datasets makes the evaluation of existing tools difficult and challenging. the authors evaluated clustering results by benchmarking on go terms. unlike most existing tools, ccst is compatible with both in vitro and in vivo srt datasets from different srt platforms, which makes it more generalizable than other approaches. experimental results suggest that ccst can improve ab initio cell clustering over prior methods on an imaging-based srt dataset5, by clearly recognizing cell groups of all four cell cycle phases of cultured cells of the same cell type. ccst was also used to identify sub-cell types and their interactions in two other imaging-based srt datasets of mouse olfactory bulb and cortical tissues6. it was further shown that ccst improves clustering results based on sequencing-based srt datasets. these findings make the compelling case that ccst can provide informative clues for better understanding cell identity, interaction, and spatial organization in tissues and organs.srt is a cutting-edge technology that has already had a major impact in biomedical research. development of tools that rely on gcns open the door to a number of further improvements. for example, spatial transcriptomic experiments often generate companion high-resolution histology information. incorporating histological features in gene expression analysis is an area that can be further explored in future studies. furthermore, most current applications analyze a single section of data. creating 3d maps of organs (such as the brain) will require a new generation of modeling methods. finally, registering expression data across different individuals is another area where developments are possible. the development of the ccst tool provides a road map of how spatially resolved transcriptomics data can be further enhanced by incorporating additional streams of information.li, j., chen, s., pan, x., yuan, y. & shen, h.-b. nat. comput. sci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00266-5 (2022).article google scholar crosetto, n., bienko, m. & van oudenaarden, a. nat. rev. genet. 16, 57–66 (2014).article google scholar burgess, d. j. nat. rev. genet. 20, 317–317 (2019).article google scholar nat. methods 18, 1 (2021).xia, c., fan, j., emanuel, g., hao, j. & zhuang, x. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 116, 19490–19499 (2019).article google scholar eng, c. h. l. et al. nature 568, 235–239 (2019).article google scholar maynard, k. r. et al. nat. neurosci. 24, 425–436 (2021).article google scholar download referencesdepartment of biomedical engineering, vanderbilt university, nashville, tn, usaxin zhoudepartment of computer science, vanderbilt university, nashville, tn, usaxin zhouyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to xin zhou.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionszhou, x. graphing cell relations in spatial transcriptomics. nat comput sci 2, 354–355 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00269-2download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00269-2anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 