the phenotypes of γδ t cells infiltrating human tumors and their role in anti-tumor immunity remain poorly understood. a new study demonstrates that vδ1 lymphocytes with cytolytic potential and features of tissue-resident-memory differentiation are predictive of survival in patients with non–small-cell lung cancer.you have full access to this article via your institution.today, immunooncology remains narrowly focused on conventional, major histocompatibility complex–restricted αβ t cells, which contributes to the plateau in advances that began after the revolution of immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as anti-pd-1 antibodies. to overcome this, the anti-tumor potential of other t cell subsets warrants further exploration. among them, γδ t cells represent only 1–5% of total t cells, but they are heavily enriched in mucosal compartments. γδ t cells express a unique t cell receptor (tcr) with a γ and a δ chain, as opposed to the αβ tcr of conventional t cells. a complete understanding of the role of γδ t cells in cancer has been hampered owing to differences in the immunobiology of mouse and human γδ t cells and to a lack of relevant transgenic models that accurately recapitulate the role of γδ t cells in human disease. it is known, however, that dominant subsets of human γδ t cells in tissues include δ1 and δ3 t cells, while δ2 t cells are clearly dominant in peripheral blood1,2,3. however, little is known about the role of γδ t cells in spontaneous protective immune responses against solid tumors, their phenotypic heterogeneity in human cancer and how they contribute to the effectiveness of immune checkpoint blockade.in this issue of nature cancer, wu et al.4 profiled the t cell landscape in human non–small-cell lung cancers (nsclcs) and found that γδ t cells represented up to 3% of total tumor-infiltrating t cells. among them, the authors identified, independently of histological differences, a clearly dominant population of vδ1 t cells. by contrast, as in healthy subjects, vδ2 t cells outnumbered other γδ t cell subsets in peripheral blood. consistent with their role in immunosurveillance in normal tissues, 27% of unique vδ1 complementarity-determining-region 3 (cdr3) sequences identified in tumors were also present in paired tumor-free lung tissues. most tumor-infiltrating vδ1 lymphocytes (tils) exhibited a cd45ra–cd27– phenotype and expressed markers associated with stemness, such as tcf7 and il-7r, which is, overall, consistent with effector memory differentiation. stemness of conventional t cells is consistently associated with positive correlations with anti-tumor immunity, owing to increased self-renewal capacity and, therefore, delayed exhaustion. in addition, γδ tils expressed markers of cytolytic activity, such as gzmb or prf1, and the tbet transcription factor, suggestive of a type 1 cytotoxic t lymphocyte (tc1)-like phenotype, which was functionally supported by in vitro analyses of cytolytic markers (fig. 1).vδ1 t cells showing features of tissue-resident memory differentiation share cdr3 sequences with their counterparts in tumor-free autologous lung tissue. these lymphocytes show a tc1-like phenotype, characterized by the production of effector mediators and tbet expression, while retaining markers of stemness. by contrast, vδ2 t cells are most likely derived from peripheral blood and are found in much lower numbers.urgently needed human studies such as that by wu et al.4 underscore the role of γδ t cells as potential major players in anti-tumor immunity. previous studies demonstrated that γδ t cells quasi-universally infiltrate human high-grade serous ovarian cancers, in which δ1 t cells also outnumber δ2 lymphocytes5. most importantly, both studies, along with a third report in hepatocarcinoma6, contribute to the growing evidence for the association between γδ t cell infiltration (predominantly vδ1 accumulation) and improved outcome5. in the case of wu et al., analysis of an independent cohort of patients with solid tumors treated with pd-1 blockers showed that patients with above-median expression levels of vδ1 t cell–specific genes survived substantially longer. a deeper understanding of the contribution of γδ tils, including those that express pd-1, to the effectiveness of immune checkpoint blockade therefore emerged from this study. the proportions of truly active tumor-specific cd8+ t cells reported in other tumors7 is comparable to the fraction of γδ t cells identified by wu et al. given the tc1 phenotype observed by the authors, the cytolytic activity of such γδ tils could be boosted by pd-1 neutralization. of equal importance, the authors found no evidence of tumor-promoting il-17 secretion by γδ tils, while circulating γδ t cells were found to express it, which suggests that il-17 production is a feature of vδ2, but not vδ1, t cells. this is in contrast to previous studies in mice in which γδ t cells indisputably showed tumor-promoting activity8, further illustrating possible major differences between human and murine γδ t cells.another interesting finding in the study by wu et al.4 is that vδ1 t cells exhibited a tissue-resident memory (trm)-like profile. while little is known about the hallmarks of the tissue residency of γδ t cells, several pieces of evidence suggest that vδ1 t cells (but not vδ2 lymphocytes) were true trm lymphocytes. first, they showed a transcriptional profile similar to that of cd8+ tils previously defined as bona fide trm lymphocytes by multiple authors7,9. second, vδ1, but not vδ2, tils expressed the trm cell surface marker cd103. third, gene sequences specifically expressed by vδ1 t cells were found in the lungs of healthy subjects at much higher levels than those expressed by vδ2-specific sequences. finally, as aforementioned, unique γδ tcr sequences were shared by tumor and adjacent tissues, indicative of tumor-infiltration by pre-existing, most likely resident, vδ1 t cells. further supporting a role for vδ1 t cells in immunosurveillance, the presence of trm-like vδ1 t cells in autologous tumor-free tissue was associated with relapse-free survival in the lung cancer cohort, while a clear trend for greater survival was also found for the presence of this specific population in tumor tissue. interestingly, a recent study that characterized populations of resident γδ t cells in hepatocellular carcinoma identified attributes of tissue residency for both vδ1 and vδ2 t cells6, which may reflect differences across different tumor types. future studies should determine whether, as with cd8+ αβ t cells7,10, trm differentiation is associated with metabolic superiority, which empowers tils to exert effective immune pressure under the metabolic restrictions of the tumor microenvironment.wu et al.4 also found a diverse repertoire of vγ chains paired in vδ1 tcrs. this raises the question of which agonistic signals activate vδ1 t cells at tumor beds, which remains, in general, a poorly understood aspect of the immunobiology of γδ t cells. cd1 molecules, loaded with or without lipid antigens11, and a broad range of less well-characterized mechanisms have been shown to activate vδ1 tcrs12. at least some of these interactions appear to occur in a cdr3-dependent, antibody-like manner. by contrast, an alternative ‘superantigen-like’ mechanism was recently reported by some co-authors of the study by wu et al. specifically, the vγ4vδ1 tcr was found to be activated by heterodimers of members of the extended family of butyrophilins, independently of the cdr3 sequence, through binding to the germline-encoded regions of the vγ4 domain of the tcr2,13. the lack of clear counterparts of human versus mouse butyrophilins has impeded a better understanding of these molecules, but recent studies showed that vγ9vδ2 tcrs are activated through a butyrophilin-dependent mechanism5,14. it is tempting to speculate that such a mechanism could have a role in activating specific vδ1 t cells at tumor beds. this should also be determined by future studies.the work described here opens many additional questions. for instance, γδ t cells have been reported to cross-present antigens to cd8+ t cells15. therefore, it will be interesting to determine whether γδ tils amplify anti-tumor immunity not only via direct cytotoxic activity but also by presenting tumor antigens to conventional αβ tils. similarly, while wu et al.4 conclusively show that vδ1 t cells outnumber vδ2 t cells in nsclc, other γδ t cell subsets remain poorly characterized. vδ3 lymphocytes, which are also predominantly found in tissues, are a likely candidate. it will be important to determine the contribution of γδ t cells to anti-tumor immunity in different histological types of cancer and, furthermore, in tumors that are sensitive versus resistant to immune checkpoint blockade. the fraction of vδ1 t cells detected in ovarian cancer5, for example, was higher than that reported by wu et al. among nsclc tils. finally, wu et al.4 investigated freshly resected nsclcs, in which the presence and activity of γδ t cells in the immune microenvironment may be distinct as compared to more advanced metastatic stages of lung cancer. understanding these issues is of critical importance given the growing interest in γδ t cells as potential immunotherapy targets and, furthermore, as platforms for the expression of chimeric antigen receptors for the treatment of solid tumors.in summary, wu et al.4 add to a growing body of research in human cancer that defines tumor-infiltrating vδ1 t cells as potential major players in anti-tumor immunity, showing that they exhibit hallmarks of cytolytic activity, tissue-residency and a memory phenotype. while most immunotherapies are narrowly focused on targeting major histocompatibility complex–restricted αβ t cells, understanding how to leverage the anti-tumor activity of γδ t cells could lead to a new generation of immunooncology interventions against cancer.fleming, c., morrissey, s., cai, y. & yan, j. trends cancer 3, 561–570 (2017).cas article google scholar di marco barros, r. et al. cell 167, 203–218.e17 (2016).article google scholar suzuki, t., hayman, l., kilbey, a., edwards, j. & coffelt, s. b. immunol. rev. 298, 198–217 (2020).cas article google scholar wu, y. et al. nat. cancer https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00376-z (2022).article pubmed google scholar payne, k. k. et al. science 369, 942–949 (2020).cas article google scholar zakeri, n. et al. nat. commun. 13, 1372 (2022).cas article google scholar anadon, c. m. et al. cancer cell 40, 545–557.e13 (2022).cas article google scholar rutkowski, m. r. et al. cancer cell 27, 27–40 (2015).cas article google scholar savas, p. et al. nat. med. 24, 986–993 (2018).cas article google scholar pan, y. et al. nature 543, 252–256 (2017).cas article google scholar luoma, a. m., castro, c. d. & adams, e. j. trends immunol. 35, 613–621 (2014).cas article google scholar deseke, m. & prinz, i. cell mol. immunol. 17, 914–924 (2020).cas article google scholar willcox, c. r. et al. immunity 51, 813–825.e14 (2019).cas article google scholar rigau, m. et al. science 367, eaay5516 (2020).cas article google scholar brandes, m. et al. proc. natl acad. sci. usa 106, 2307–2312 (2009).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of immunology, h. lee moffitt cancer center & research institute, tampa, fl, usajose r. conejo-garcia & patrick innamaratodepartment of gynecologic oncology, h. lee moffitt cancer center & research institute, tampa, fl, usajose r. conejo-garciadepartment of malignant hematology, h. lee moffitt cancer center & research institute, tampa, fl, usajose r. conejo-garciayou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jose r. conejo-garcia.j.r.c.-g. has stock options in compass therapeutics, anixa biosciences and alloy therapeutics; conducts sponsored research for anixa biosciences; receives honoraria from alloy therapeutics and leidos; and has intellectual property with compass therapeutics and anixa biosciences.reprints and permissionsconejo-garcia, j.r., innamarato, p. γδ t cells share the spotlight in cancer. nat cancer 3, 657–658 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00396-9download citationpublished: 28 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00396-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 