microbiota profiling using stool samples is limited in its ability to represent intestinal microbial dynamics. crispr-engineered bacteria can be used to acquire cellular rnas and create a gene expression ‘memory’ during gastrointestinal transit, with the potential to capture microbial transcriptomic changes in the gastrointestinal tract without invasive sampling.you have full access to this article via your institution.refers to schmidt, f. et al. noninvasive assessment of gut function using transcriptional recording sentinel cells. science 376, eabm6038 (2022).the composition and activity of the gut microbiota vary substantially along the longitudinal transect of the gastrointestinal tract and within the physiological niches of the lumen, mucosa and colonic crypts1. physiological and biological conditions vary considerably across these niches within the gut, with microbiota exhibiting different preferences and responses to each2. these intestinal niches are predominantly where the microbiota interacts with epithelial and immune cells and consequently influences disease or homeostasis of the host. nonetheless, owing to difficulties in sampling the gut microbiota in situ using invasive enteroscopy and colonoscopy, the gut microbiome is often studied using stool samples. however, because physiological conditions change substantially as microorganisms are shed in stool, the transcriptional activity of the microbiota will differ dramatically from that in the gastrointestinal tract itself3. furthermore, individual stool samples represent microbiome snapshots with substantial temporal and longitudinal variability4. these factors make stool sampling an often biased and noisy measure of microbial transcriptomics, which can obscure microbiome gene expression changes in response to endogenous host signals and exogenous environmental exposures. for example, stool samples do not capture the full diversity of antibiotic resistance genes in the gut5, or personalized differences in permissiveness to probiotic colonization in the colonic mucosa3 and downstream differential effects on the human microbiome, gut transcriptome and resistome5.in a new study6 in science, schmidt et al. present a solution that builds upon their previous in vitro-based work7 in which they engineered the so-called record-seq crispr–cas system in escherichia coli that acquires spacers from cellular rnas and stores them in a small crispr array. although these integration events are relatively rare, with only a minor fraction of the cells successfully integrating a spacer, the acquired rna segments represent a temporal average of the population’s transcriptional state throughout the experiment. in their recent work6, the researchers orally administered engineered e. coli with record-seq to germ-free mice, and the e. coli cells shed in the mouse faeces had their record-seq arrays sequenced following selective amplification directly from stool8. the recorded transcriptomic profile, therefore, represented an average of e. coli gene expression during transit in the gut for the duration of the experiment. accordingly, the number of spacers integrated increased by day of colonization and was greater in the lower gastrointestinal tract. a major advantage of the record-seq system compared with faecal bacterial rna sequencing (rna-seq) was demonstrated in an experiment in which mice were fed starch-based or fat-rich diets for 9 days: 13 days after cessation, record-seq retained a transcriptomic ‘memory’ of the bacterial response to the dietary changes that was not seen in the transitory rna-seq measurement. furthermore, record-seq successfully captured differential responses in microbial gene expression throughout the gastrointestinal tract. comparing differential gene expression throughout the gastrointestinal tract between mice fed chow and starch diets, the researchers found that genes for hexuronate catabolism were distinctly upregulated in response to starch in the caecal and proximal colon lumen but not in faecal rna-seq. yet, these genes were significantly (adjusted p < 0.05) upregulated in faecal record-seq: a lingering memory from the bacterial population’s time in the proximal gastrointestinal tract. this method, therefore, offers several opportunities to improve our understanding of microbiome–diet and host–microbiota interactions. first, it might allow the identification of previously undetectable effects of diets on bacterial gene expression as a step towards deciphering mechanisms of microbiome-mediated beneficial or detrimental modulation of host’s health by specific nutrients. more broadly, it has the potential to uncover functional contributions of commensal bacteria to pathologies occurring in proximal niches of the gut, such as coeliac disease or various intestinal cancers. indeed, in a mouse model of dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis, record-seq captured changes in microbial gene expression up to 2 weeks after colitis induction6. thus, record-seq can be used in disease models with transitory, uneven or cyclic inflammatory flares (for example, crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis or rheumatoid arthritis) to capture a more even longitudinal average of microbial signals of disease that might be lost in individual sampling time points.record-seq can also be used to identify signals of microorganism–microorganism interactions in the gut, including cross-feeding of e. coli with fibre-derived saccharides from bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. schmidt et al. showed that the record-seq system could also be multiplexed with barcodes, which enables the reporting of gene expression of multiple bacterial species and strains at once, but also enables precision experiments that can identify changes in gene expression between co-inhabiting isogenic knockout strains. this feature could be harnessed for investigating microbiome-mediated effects on intestinal colonization and the efficacy of microbial therapeutics such as probiotics or faecal microbiota transplantation.record-seq represents a powerful tool for elucidating microbial gene expression within model microbial communities (fig. 1). primarily, its ability to recapitulate longitudinal averages of gene expression, as well as its ability to capture signals of gene expression in situ in the gut without invasive sampling, can be used to identify microbial transcriptomic signals in disease models and microorganism–microorganism interactions that might be unidentifiable using faecal rna-seq. however, it is not without limitations: first, it requires prior knowledge regarding the strains involved in a given phenotype, and these strains need to be amenable to genetic manipulation. the efficacy of the record-seq system in important gut firmicutes or bacteroidetes commensals, which might require specialized genetic toolkits9, remains to be determined. furthermore, it will be crucial to determine whether bacteria engineered with record-seq can successfully colonize mice with pre-existing acquired microbiota and whether their physiology and in vivo fitness are comparable to the non-engineered wild-type strain. regardless, there are several promising future directions for record-seq and similar technologies. in particular, recording systems might be able to grant further insight into longitudinal dynamics of gene expression by tracking the order of multiple spacer acquisitions, as has been done in dna-based crispr recording systems10. an rna recording system with sufficiently increased integration efficiency could create a longitudinal ‘time series’ array of gene expression, enabling lineage tracking within the gut. finally, although routine clinical applications of genetically engineered biosensing strains remain distant, it is conceivable to imagine their use in the clinic as highly robust markers of gut disease states without the need for invasive sampling.a | gut colonization with a record-seq-engineered strain can record transcriptional states throughout the gastrointestinal tract. b | record-seq represents a longitudinal average of transcriptional states throughout an experimental time course. c | multiple bacterial strains with barcoded record-seq arrays can be co-inoculated to report strain-specific transcriptional changes. rt, reverse transcriptase.donaldson, g. p., lee, s. m. & mazmanian, s. k. gut biogeography of the bacterial microbiota. nat. rev. microbiol. 14, 20–32 (2016).cas article google scholar tropini, c., earle, k. a., huang, k. c. & sonnenburg, j. l. the gut microbiome: connecting spatial organization to function. cell host microbe 21, 433–442 (2017).cas article google scholar zmora, n. et al. personalized gut mucosal colonization resistance to empiric probiotics is associated with unique host and microbiome features. cell 174, 1388–1405.e21 (2018).cas article google scholar olsson, l. m. et al. dynamics of the normal gut microbiota: a longitudinal one-year population study in sweden. cell host microbe 30, 726–739.e3 (2022).cas article google scholar montassier, e. et al. probiotics impact the antibiotic resistance gene reservoir along the human gi tract in a person-specific and antibiotic-dependent manner. nat. microbiol. 6, 1043–1054 (2021).cas article google scholar schmidt, f. et al. noninvasive assessment of gut function using transcriptional recording sentinel cells. science 376, eabm6038 (2022).cas article google scholar schmidt, f., cherepkova, m. y. & platt, r. j. transcriptional recording by crispr spacer acquisition from rna. nature 562, 380–385 (2018).cas article google scholar tanna, t., schmidt, f., cherepkova, m. y., okoniewski, m. & platt, r. j. recording transcriptional histories using record-seq. nat. protoc. 15, 513–539 (2020).cas article google scholar jin, w.-b. et al. genetic manipulation of gut microbes enables single-gene interrogation in a complex microbiome. cell 185, 547–562.e22 (2022).cas article google scholar sheth, r. u., yim, s. s., wu, f. l. & wang, h. h. multiplex recording of cellular events over time on crispr biological tape. science 358, 1457–1461 (2017).cas article google scholar download referencesw. harry feinstone department of molecular microbiology and immunology, johns hopkins bloomberg school of public health, baltimore, md, usaalexander crits-christoph & jotham suezyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to jotham suez.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionscrits-christoph, a., suez, j. gut bacteria go on record. nat rev gastroenterol hepatol 19, 557–558 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-022-00653-3download citationpublished: 28 june 2022issue date: september 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-022-00653-3anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 