rationalizing the difference in the catalytic properties within a group of materials is a challenging task. a method is now proposed that addresses this issue by predicting the activity and stability of platinum-based electrocatalysts from operando spectroscopic data.you have full access to this article via your institution.the urgent need to develop sustainable, fossil-fuel-free energy and alternative transport schemes has drawn increasing attention to electrocatalysis. however, wider practical and industrial adoption of electrochemical processes, such as those powering fuel cells, requires more efficient and economically viable catalysts. but, what makes a certain catalyst perform better than others? and more importantly, is there a practical recipe that would inform us what needs to be changed in an electrocatalytic system, so that its performance is steered in the desired direction — enhanced activity, durability, selectivity towards certain reaction product? despite decades of research, these questions still remain very hard to answer.the brute-force approach involving testing thousands of different candidate catalysts, akin to the celebrated efforts of alwin mittasch1 in the search for the best ammonia synthesis catalysts in the beginning of twentieth century, can get us only so far. contributing to the difficulty of the problem is the fact that the best modern catalysts are increasingly complex, multicomponent systems. their performance depends on the interplay between a multitude of parameters, such as chemical composition, atomistic and electronic structure, surface morphology, particle size and shape, or exposed facets. it is thus highly desirable to find a general descriptor based on structural parameters that could be used to predict the catalytic performance for a broad range of materials, and that would allow identification of the most promising directions for the further optimization of catalytic systems.in the context of the oxygen reduction reaction (orr) that takes place on the cathode of fuel cells and is commonly enabled by platinum-based electrocatalysts, seminal works demonstrated that the activity can be explained by considering the binding energy for oxygen species on the catalyst surface2,3. the principle of the optimal binding energy that can be visualized in terms of the famous volcano plots, requires a balance between adsorption of oxygen and desorption of reaction intermediates, allowing the reaction to occur but preventing catalyst poisoning. the adsorbates’ binding energies, in turn, are controlled by the electronic structure of the catalyst (for example, the position of the d-band centre)2. the binding energies for adsorbates and electronic structure, however, can both be best derived from quantum mechanical calculations (for example, in the density functional theory formalism), and are not easy to deduce from experimental observations. despite huge progress in ab initio simulations, comprehensive modelling of the processes taking place in realistic multicomponent electrocatalytic systems, including the accurate accounting for the interactions with the electrolyte, is still beyond the reach of first-principles methods. therefore, while useful for understanding the trends in simple model systems, these considerations cannot be directly applied to the screening of practical catalytic systems. we also need to keep in mind that catalysts respond and transform under reaction conditions. as a result, the well-designed initial material prepared by advanced synthesis methods often has little resemblance to the actual state of a working catalyst within an electrochemical device. consequently, an ideal descriptor of a catalyst structure is such that it can be verified in experimental operando measurements.the latest work by jin huang et al. in nature catalysis is an important step in this direction4. the researchers conclude that the orr activity of platinum-based heterometallic catalysts is to a large extent determined by two factors: the strain induced by the lattice mismatch for platinum and the secondary metal, and the degree of interactions between pt atoms and their nearest neighbours, resulting in changes in the electronic structure (the so-called ligand effect). importantly, both quantities can be conveniently derived from the same experimental x-ray absorption spectroscopy (xas) data. lattice strain results in changes in interatomic distances, probed by extended x-ray absorption fine structure (exafs; fig. 1d). on the other hand, interestingly, huang et al. propose and demonstrate that the coupling between pt and the secondary metal (such as nickel) can be characterized by the degree of broadening of the main feature in the x-ray absorption near-edge structure (xanes, fig. 1c) region. considering that xas is ideally suited for operando investigations5, both quantities can be obtained experimentally for the working catalysts in their active state. the researchers demonstrate that a linear combination of the exafs-derived lattice strain and the xanes feature broadening is a robust predictor of the binding energy for oxygen adsorbates. as a result, it also accurately predicts the catalyst’s specific orr activity. the team’s approach is tested on a set of bimetallic catalysts with pt-rich surfaces, obtained by dealloying octahedral bimetallic nanoparticles (fig. 1a), which are exposed to further changes in composition and morphology during the accelerated degradation tests. furthermore, the researchers demonstrate that the obtained relationship between their xas-based binary experimental descriptor and the catalytic properties holds for a broad range of pt-based catalysts, including ternary ptnico and ptnicu catalysts with different ordering degree (fig. 1b). in addition, they synthesize a ptnico catalyst guided by their descriptor and demonstrate its excellent orr performance. thus, the applicability of their designed structure descriptor is confirmed for a broad range of heterometallic catalysts, as well as its potential for practical catalyst screening4.a, models of ptni nanocatalysts with different degrees of alloying. b, volcano plot showing the relationship between specific orr activity and the value of a binary descriptor of catalyst structure, obtained for a series of binary and ternary pt-based alloys, including ptni, ptnico and ptnicu alloys with a different degree of atomic ordering. c,d, the binary descriptor is constructed for two representative examples based on the broadening of the main pt l3-edge xanes feature, shown in c, and on the lattice strain, as obtained from the fitting of fourier-transformed (ft) pt l3-edge exafs, shown in d. figure adapted from ref. 4, springer nature ltd.the study by huang et al. highlights the importance of spectroscopic methods and, in particular, of xas for guiding the design of novel functional materials. applications of xas in understanding the structure–property relationships in pt catalysts for orr can be traced back to the 1980s6,7. almost immediately, the sensitivity of the pt l3-edge xanes to the details of the pt atoms’ environment was recognized6,8. on the other hand, the correlation between the contraction of pt–pt distance, as derived from exafs data for alloy catalysts, and an enhanced orr activity, had also been noticed8,9. the work by huang et al. builds upon these earlier observations, and suggests that more robust correlation between the in situ xas data and catalyst properties can be achieved, when considering both the structural effects and electronic effects, as probed by exafs and xanes, respectively. thus, their designed catalyst descriptor captures better the complexity and interplay of different processes taking place in catalysts at work. one can envisage that recent breakthroughs in data science have the potential to discover increasingly subtler structure–property relationships. for example, machine-learning-based algorithms have been proposed that enable derivation of relevant predictors of the material’s functionality based on a large set of provided features. in one approach, referred to as sure-independence screening and sparsifying operator (sisso), the desired property of the material (for example, the stability or activity of a catalyst), is represented as a large function of the material’s properties and their combinations10. the respective importance of the various property combinations to this function is then optimized to fit the available structure–property-relationship data. a crucial constraint is that the solution should be sparse; namely, as few as possible of the material’s properties should have non-zero contributions. this allows one to find the simplest possible relation between structure and functionality. together with the study of huang et al., such examples set the stage for an upcoming trend, where increasingly more elaborate descriptors of the catalyst state lead to a greater accuracy in the identification of the most promising catalysts, and could finally turn into a reality the old dream of rationally designing novel catalysts.mittasch, a. & frankenburg, w. in advances in catalysis 2 (eds frankenburg, w. g., rideal, e. k. & komarewsky, v. i.) 81–104 (elsevier, 1950).norskov, j. k., bligaard, t., rossmeisl, j. & christensen, c. h. nat. chem. 1, 37–46 (2009).cas article google scholar kulkarni, a., siahrostami, s., patel, a. & nørskov, j. k. chem. rev. 118, 2302–2312 (2018).cas article google scholar huang, j. et al. nat. catal. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00797-0 (2022).article google scholar timoshenko, j. & roldan cuenya, b. chem. rev. 121, 882–961 (2021).cas article google scholar mathew, r. j. & russell, a. e. top. catal. 10, 231–239 (2000).cas google scholar mcbreen, j. & o’grady, w. e. j. power sources 22, 323–340 (1988).cas article google scholar russell, a. e. & rose, a. chem. rev. 104, 4613–4636 (2004).cas article google scholar mukerjee, s., srinivasan, s., soriaga, m. p. & mcbreen, j. j. electrochem. soc. 142, 1409–1422 (1995).cas article google scholar ouyang, r., curtarolo, s., ahmetcik, e., scheffler, m. & ghiringhelli, l. m. phys. rev. mater. 2, 083802 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesdepartment of interface science, fritz-haber institute of the max-planck society, berlin, germanyjanis timoshenkoyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to janis timoshenko.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionstimoshenko, j. spectroscopy predicts catalyst functionality. nat catal 5, 469–470 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00809-zdownload citationpublished: 24 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-022-00809-zanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 