hepatic inflammation is a major co-morbidity in obesity. new work shows that activated brown adipose tissue releases maresin-2, a lipid molecule derived from docosahexaenoic acid, which targets the liver and actively protects against obesity-induced hepatic inflammation.you have full access to this article via your institution.research in the last few years consolidated the evidence that brown adipose tissue (bat) activity is related to protection against metabolic diseases associated with low-grade inflammation, such as obesity and cardiovascular disease, in rodent models and in humans1. the beneficial effects of bat on metabolic health were traditionally attributed to its capacity to act as a sink of glucose and lipids for oxidation to sustain thermogenesis, thereby reducing hyperglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia and ultimately enhancing energy expenditure and preventing obesity2. however, the ability of bat to secrete bioactive compounds that signal to other tissues and organs has been growingly recognized as an additional—and maybe particularly relevant—mechanism to promote metabolic health. bat has been found to release adipokines of peptidic nature, so-called brown adipokines or batokines, as well as exosome-contained mirnas and lipokines, which target the liver to protect against hepatic steatosis, target the heart to prevent cardiac dysfunction and target white adipose tissue to favour browning and to enhance energy expenditure3. in this issue of nature metabolism, sugimoto et al. show that bat releases the bioactive lipid maresin-2, which targets the liver and mediates a protective effect of bat activation on the systemic and hepatic inflammation associated with experimental obesity4 (fig. 1).in obesity, thermogenic activation of bat through cold-induced β3-adrenergic stimulus induces the expression of the enzymes alox2 (arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase) and seh (soluble epoxide hydrolase). this leads to the active conversion of docosahexaenoic acid into maresin-2, which is released into circulation. maresin-2 targets the liver and promotes the recruitment of trem2-positive macrophages, which promotes the resolution of inflammation. by this means, bat-originating maresin-2 reduces the local hepatic inflammation elicited by obesity and also contributes to decreased systemic inflammation, as evidenced by reduction in the levels of the cytokine tnfα.maresin-1 and maresin-2 belong to the family of specialized pro-resolving mediators, a class of polyunsaturated fatty acid-derived lipids that act on key events of inflammation to promote the return to homeostasis—the so-called resolution of inflammation—by increasing macrophage phagocytosis and countering proinflammatory molecules5. sugimoto et al. report that obesity-induced systemic and hepatic inflammation are prevented by cold exposure and concomitant bat activation in mice. they also found that, upon thermogenic activation, there is an increase in maresin-2 synthesis and release to circulation by bat, which results from the cold-mediated induction of arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase and soluble epoxide hydrolase, the key enzymes for maresin-2 synthesis, in bat. suppression of maresin-2 synthesis in bat via gene invalidation of 12-lipoxygenase increased hepatic inflammation. the effect of maresin-2 resolving inflammation in liver involved the recruitment of macrophages bearing the trem2 (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2) receptor, a macrophage type with restorative, counter-inflammatory properties6.in addition to identifying a bat-to-liver signalling pathway, the findings by sugimoto et al. challenge several concepts relevant to the role of maresin-2, and possibly relevant to resolvins in general, in relation to inter-organ signalling. while resolvins are commonly believed to act locally, the new findings identify the potential of maresin-2 to act at a distance, in an endocrine manner, and also challenge the traditional view that myeloid cells are the major source of resolvins such as maresin-2. the new data, in concordance with a previous report7, indicate that brown adipocytes harbour a powerful enzymatic machinery enabling maresin-2 synthesis and release.maresin-2 can now be added to the already identified bat-originating factors targeting the liver. bat releases neuregulin-4, which protects the liver against steatosis8, and exosomes released by bat contain sirna-99b, which affects systemic metabolism via hepatic production of fgf219. however, maresin-2 appears to influence specifically liver inflammation, independently of actions on hepatic steatosis and metabolism, which is thus a distinctive physiological action of the maresin-2-based bat-to-liver signalling.there is remarkable knowledge on the cross-talk of the bat secretome and immune cells locally at bat depots in relation to the control of thermogenesis10. however, much less is known regarding the actions of immune system-related molecules secreted by bat when acting at a distance. interleukin-6, a cytokine intensely released by bat after stress stimulus, targets the liver and causes enhanced hepatic gluconeogenesis and reduced inflammation11. the cxcl14 chemokine, a cold-induced batokine, exerts its major effects on white fat—and not in the liver—thereby promoting m2-type macrophage recruitment and promoting induction of adipose browning12. the new data indicate a specific targeting of maresin-2 to the liver but not to white adipose tissue, another major site of inflammation in obesity. further research will be needed to obtain a comprehensive view on the molecular entities in the bat secretome and their mechanisms mediating this intriguing tissue-specific targeting. remaining questions arising from the study include the assessment of whether reduced synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines in bat contributes to cold-induced protection against inflammation in the liver and also whether lipid species other than maresin-2, and potentially lipid species affected by experimental 12-lipoxygenase invalidation, contribute to hepatoprotection. moreover, the mechanisms of action of maresin-2 in the liver via recruitment of trem2-positive macrophages and perhaps via additional anti-inflammatory pathways would also be worth exploring.the identification of protective bat-to-liver signalling based on maresin-2 may have biomedical implications in human pathophysiology. preliminary data in the sugimoto et al. study suggest a concordance of human data with mouse-based studies: treatment with mirabegron, a β3-adrenergic activator of bat, increases blood maresin-2 levels in humans, and human brown adipocytes synthesize maresin-2. research on the potential of maresin-2—or on maresin-2-based molecules modified to enhance stability—is warranted in the search for pharmacological tools to protect against hepatic inflammation. in fact, maresin-2-mediated actions may be particularly attractive given the known abilities of specialized pro-resolving mediators to protect against inflammation without leading to immunosuppression13. would maresin-2-based strategies be useful for ameliorating hepatic inflammation resulting from insults other than obesity? could pharmacological, or even transplantation-based, strategies to increase bat activity result in particular beneficial effects on liver inflammation thanks to increased release of maresin-2 to circulation? all these questions highlight the importance of further research directions inspired by the new discoveries.for decades and until the middle of the twentieth century, before the discovery of its thermogenic function, bat was hypothesized to be an endocrine gland14. whether by chance or by intuition of the predecessors in bat research, current data are reinforcing the view of the importance of the bat secretome in multiple pathophysiological processes, with hepatic inflammation among them. in humans, where bat amounts are low, the quantitative impact of bat oxidative activity on systemic metabolism has been a long-debated topic. the secretory role of bat as a source of regulatory molecules that affect different organs and tissues may be especially relevant even when the amount of bat is small. the identification of a bat-to-liver signalling axis regulating inflammation mediated by maresin-2 is an important contribution to our growing awareness of the importance of an active, secretory bat in health.becher, t. et al. nat. med. 27, 58–65 (2021).cas article google scholar sidossis, l. & kajimura, s. j. clin. invest. 125, 478–486 (2015).article google scholar gavaldà-navarro, a., villarroya, j., cereijo, r., giralt, m. & villarroya, f. rev. endocr. metab. disord. 23, 31–41 (2022).article google scholar sugimoto, s. et al. nat. metab. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00590-0 (2022). -.article google scholar clària, j., flores-costa, r., duran-güell, m. & lópez-vicario, c. biochim. biophys. acta mol. cell biol. lipids 1866, 159023 (2021).article google scholar coelho, i., duarte, n., barros, a., macedo, m. p. & penha-gonçalves, c. front. immunol. 11, 616044 (2021).article google scholar leiria, l. o. et al. cell metab. 30, 768–783.e7 (2019).cas article google scholar wang, g. x. et al. nat. med. 20, 1436–1443 (2014).cas article google scholar thomou, t. et al. nature 542, 450–455 (2017).cas article google scholar villarroya, f., cereijo, r., villarroya, j., gavaldà-navarro, a. & giralt, m. cell metab. 27, 954–961 (2018).cas article google scholar qing, h. et al. cell 182, 372–387.e14 (2020).cas article google scholar cereijo, r. et al. cell metab. 28, 750–763.e6 (2018).cas article google scholar serhan, c. n. & levy, b. d. j. clin. invest. 128, 2657–2669 (2018).article google scholar trayhun, p. methods mol. biol. 2448, 1–18 (2022).article google scholar download referencesa.g-n. and f.v. are funded by agencia estatal de investigación, ministerio de ciencia e innovación, spain. f.v. is an icrea academia researcher under support of generalitat de catalunya.department of biochemistry and molecular biology and institute of biomedicine, university of barcelona, catalonia, spainfrancesc villarroya & aleix gavaldà-navarrociber fisiopatologia de la obesidad y nutrition, madrid, spainfrancesc villarroya & aleix gavaldà-navarroyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to francesc villarroya.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsvillarroya, f., gavaldà-navarro, a. brown fat resolves hepatic inflammation in obesity. nat metab 4, 649–650 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00596-8download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: june 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42255-022-00596-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 