extrathymic mhcii+rorc+ aire-expressing cells that share characteristics with type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ilc3s) internalize c. albicans and present its antigens, priming the development of candida-specific th17 cells.you have full access to this article via your institution.thymic expression of the transcriptional regulator aire is critical for enforcing central immune tolerance1. however, the immunological functions of extrathymic aire-expressing cells (etacs) remain incompletely understood. aire deficiency causes multi-organ autoimmunity and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (cmc), a condition characterized by severe, recurrent mucosal, but not systemic, infections by the commensal fungus candida albicans, typically affecting the mouth and esophagus1. in this issue of nature immunology, dobeš et al.2 demonstrate that a population of mouse mhcii+rorc+aire+ cells that share characteristics with type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ilc3s) can internalize and present c. albicans and prime the generation of candida-specific th17 cells, which can contribute to protective il-17-dependent antifungal defence at mucosal barriers3,4. in this paper, mice with aire deletion restricted to extrathymic rorc-expressing cells exhibited reduced numbers of candida-specific th17 cells, associated with increased fungal proliferation in kidney and mucosal tissues when challenged in recall models of systemic and mucosal candidiasis.the role of thymic aire in central immune tolerance is well-defined. aire deficiency in medullary thymic epithelial cells (mtecs) impairs the intrathymic expression of peripheral tissue-restricted antigens, characterized by defective negative selection of self-reactive t cells, impaired development of regulatory t cells and autoantibody production1, together driving multi-organ autoimmunity. beyond the thymus, aire is known to be expressed in bone marrow-derived etacs within secondary lymphoid tissues1, to contribute to maternal–fetal tolerance, and to prevent autoimmune diabetes in mice by promoting negative selection of t cells5,6. however, the breadth of immunological functions of etacs remains poorly elucidated.aire deficiency causes apeced (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy), also known as aps-1 (autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1)1. besides life-threatening multi-organ autoimmunity, cmc is a common (prevalence of ~80–90%), early manifestation of apeced, and its mechanistic basis is complex. some cases of cmc are clearly associated with the presence of neutralizing autoantibodies against th17 cytokines7. however, the association of these autoantibodies with cmc is incompletely penetrant, indicating that other factors also contribute1, including exacerbated ifnγ production by aire-deficient mucosal t cells8. these t cells were recently shown to promote epithelial barrier dysfunction and to underlie oral fungal susceptibility in aire–/– mice8. enhanced type 1 immune responses were also evident in the oral mucosa of a large apeced patient cohort8. to gain further mechanistic insights into the mucosal fungal susceptibility of aire deficiency, dobeš et al. examined the role of extrathymic aire+ cells with characteristics of ilc3s, which were previously reported to display antigen-presenting cell (apc) characteristics9, in promoting adaptive immune responses to c. albicans.the authors first examined the transcriptional profile of aire+ ilc3s at steady state and found high expression of genes associated with conventional ilc3s (for example, rorc, il7r and ccr6), but no expression of other classical ilc3-associated genes (notably il17a, il17f and il22). these cells — which the authors referred to as aire+ ilc3s for the purpose of their paper (and will be referred as such here as well, but see below) — also expressed genes encoding mhcii, co-stimulatory molecules and fungal-sensing pattern recognition receptors (prrs), suggesting the capacity to prime and activate antigen-inexperienced t cells. of note, repeated intravenous challenge of mice with heat-killed c. albicans (hkca) further induced the expression of fungal-sensing prrs, co-stimulatory molecules and pro-inflammatory mediators in these aire+ ilc3s and up-regulated aire and co-stimulatory molecules in aire–mhcii+ ilc3s, potentially resulting in acquisition of some molecular features of their aire+ ilc3 counterparts in response to fungal stimulation. collectively, these findings indicate that aire+ ilc3s are equipped with machineries for fungal recognition, antigen presentation and t cell activation (fig. 1).in the thymic medulla (left), aire expression in mtecs regulates the intrathymic expression of peripheral tras, which are displayed on mhcii to promote the negative selection of self-reactive t cells. in secondary lymphoid organs (right), aire+mhcii+rorc+ ilc3s (also defined as janus cells6) are equipped with machineries for fungal recognition, antigen presentation and t cell activation. they internalize candida albicans, present its antigens and contribute to the generation of candida-specific th17 cells. professional apcs such as cx3cr1+ dcs effectively present c. albicans antigens to t cells and were shown to prime the generation of candida-specific th17 cells. aire, autoimmune regulator; apc, antigen-presenting cell; dc, dendritic cell; ilc3; type 3 innate lymphoid cell; mtec, medullary thymic epithelial cell; tcr, t cell receptor; tra, tissue-restricted antigen.the authors then examined whether aire+ ilc3s can take up c. albicans for antigen presentation on mhcii molecules and subsequent generation of candida-specific t cells. first, they demonstrated that ilc3s can internalize hkca. second, they compared the antigen-presenting capacity of ilc3s to conventional apcs. they pulsed cells with transgenic hkca expressing ovalbumin (hkca-ova) in vitro, then incubated them with nfat-gfp do11.10 tcr reporter t cells, which express gfp upon tcr triggering by ova peptide presented in the context of mhcii. aire+ ilc3s activated the reporter line, albeit to a lesser extent than conventional apcs. moreover, following repeated intravenous injections with hkca-ova, aire+ ilc3s and conventional apcs were harvested and incubated ex vivo with nfat-gfp do11.10 tcr cells. aire+ ilc3s activated the reporter t cells, but required three daily hkca-ova intravenous injections to efficiently do so, in contrast to conventional apcs that required less antigen exposure in vivo. while these parallel approaches do point to antigen-presenting capacity in a subset of ilc3s, further studies are required under more physiologic conditions (for example, live candida challenge in vivo) to determine their relative contribution to t cell activation compared to professional dendritic cells (dcs). similarly, the use of mice with a conditional deletion of mhcii in conventional cx3cr1+ dcs, ilc3s or both, would help to dissect the potential crosstalk between, and importance of, each subset to antigen presentation in vivo.next, to examine the role of aire+ ilc3s in priming candida-specific t cells, the authors generated mice lacking aire in rorc-expressing cells (ilc3δaire mice). they adoptively transferred naive t cells into these mice, challenged them with repeated intravenous injections of hkca-ova, and observed significantly decreased ova-specific rorc+ th17 cells, while the generation of ova-specific th1 and th2 cells was not evaluated. then, the authors used mhcii tetramer staining for the c. albicans-specific epitope derived from the adhesin als1. following repeated intravenous injections with hkca, the authors noted decreased generation of candida-specific t cells in ilc3δaire mice relative to wild-type mice and mice lacking aire in mtecs, indicating that extrathymic aire orchestrates this response. to understand how ilc3s may prime candida-specific t cells, the authors performed rna sequencing in wild-type and aire-deficient ilc3s and ova-specific th17 cells following repeated intravenous injections of hkca-ova. aire expression in ilc3s was associated with induction of anti-apoptotic transcriptional programs in th17 cells, presumably facilitating their persistence. collectively, these findings indicate that extrathymic aire activates and promotes the accumulation of candida-specific effector th17 cells. a study using single-cell multiomics concluded that aire+ ilc3s, termed janus cells, may more closely resemble a subset of migratory dcs with low cell-surface expression of cd11c and ccr7, rather than ilc3s6. rorc+ dcs were recently recognized10 and mhcii+ ilcs were shown to participate in antigen presentation of commensal bacteria11. thus, further studies are required to precisely define the nature of aire+rorc+ cells. single-cell multiomics will also help define the heterogeneity and functions of human etacs, most of which are cd11c+ccr7+ (refs. 12,13).next, the authors examined whether aire deletion in rorc+ cells impairs candida control in vivo. mice are not inherently colonized by candida and do not exhibit robust candida-specific adaptive responses at steady state. thus, the authors employed a series of recall mouse models of candidiasis, primarily via repeated intravenous injections of hkca followed by infection with live c. albicans. following intravenous live c. albicans infection, hkca-primed ilc3δaire mice exhibited enhanced fungal burden in the kidney and increased mortality. although this priming approach does present limitations, in that it does not recapitulate physiologic conditions of fungal encounter by the mammalian immune system, the phenotype is striking. yet, one can speculate that additional mechanisms may be at play here, beyond decreased candida-specific th17 cells recruited by ilc3 subsets, as it is widely recognized that the mouse model of systemic candidiasis relies on phagocytes, not lymphocytes, for defence14. this finding may, in fact, point intriguingly to a role for etacs in modulating trained immunity.the immune mechanisms underlying mucosal versus systemic anti-candida protection are disparate14. in fact, the best evidence comes from patients with apeced, who readily manifest cmc, but do not develop systemic candidiasis1. thus, the authors then evaluated the role of aire+ ilc3s during mucosal c. albicans challenges. first, repeated oral administration of live c. albicans in antibiotic-exposed ilc3δaire mice led to decreased generation of candida-specific th17 cells in secondary lymphoid tissues and lamina propria, although the global th17 response was only minimally affected. ilc3δaire mice exhibited a modest (~3-fold) increase in mucosal fungal burden across gastrointestinal tract compartments. the authors then wanted to further study the oral mucosa because the lower gastrointestinal tract is not typically affected by candida in apeced1. they primed ilc3δaire mice with repeated intravenous injections of hkca followed by oral infection with live c. albicans two weeks later. as before, candida-specific th17 cells were decreased in secondary lymphoid tissues and tongue, associated with significantly increased (~100-fold) fungal proliferation in the oral mucosa. further study will be required to define the precise mechanisms underlying oral fungal susceptibility in these primed mice, since it has been reported that even in the recall mouse model of oral candidiasis, il-17-dependent protection is predominantly driven by innate lymphoid rather than adaptive lymphoid cell subsets4. indeed, cd4-deficient mice fully control oral fungal growth in the recall model, as cd8+ and γδ t cells compensate for the absence of il-17 from th17 cells4. moreover, intact th17 cells, il-17-producing innate lymphocytes and il-17 receptor-dependent molecules have been reported in the oral mucosa of apeced patients with cmc and of aire–/– mice following primary c. albicans infection8. therefore, the observed increased oral fungal burden in ilc3δaire mice seems unlikely to be explained solely by decreased generation of candida-specific th17 cells and a global assessment of mucosal il-17 responses would be required. moreover, it is important to examine whether the oral epithelial barrier is disrupted in ilc3δaire mice by repeated intravenous hkca injections (for example, via aberrant ifnγ–stat1 responses and/or other mechanisms8), as this could potentially contribute to mucosal fungal invasion.in conclusion, this intriguing and thought-provoking study potentially uncovers novel functional facets of etac biology, indicating a contribution to priming and/or expansion of candida-specific th17 cells that is relevant to antifungal immunity. from a translational perspective, improved understanding of the precise mechanisms by which extrathymic aire contributes to peripheral immune tolerance and mucosal antifungal immunity could have implications for the management of apeced patients.constantine, g. m. & lionakis, m. s. immunol. rev. 287, 103–120 (2019).cas article google scholar dobeš, j. b.-n. et al. nat. immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01247-6 (2022).conti, h. r. et al. j. exp. med. 211, 2075–2084 (2014).cas article google scholar hernandez-santos, n. et al. mucosal immunol. 6, 900–910 (2013).cas article google scholar gillis-buck, e. et al. sci. immunol. 6, eabf1968 (2021).cas article google scholar wang, j. et al. sci. immunol. 6, eabl5053 (2021).cas article google scholar puel, a. et al. j. exp. med. 207, 291–297 (2010).cas article google scholar break, t. j. et al. science 371, eaay5731 (2021).cas article google scholar yamano, t. et al. j. exp. med. 216, 1027–1037 (2019).cas article google scholar brown, c. c. et al. cell 179, 846–863.e824 (2019).cas article google scholar hepworth, m. r. et al. science 348, 1031–1035 (2015).cas article google scholar fergusson, j. r. et al. front. immunol. 9, 2902 (2018).cas article google scholar poliani, p. l. et al. am. j. pathol. 176, 1104–1112 (2010).cas article google scholar lionakis, m. s. & levitz, s. m. annu. rev. immunol. 36, 157–191 (2018).cas article google scholar download referencesthis work was supported by the division of intramural research of the niaid (zia ai001175 to m.s.l.).fungal pathogenesis section, laboratory of clinical immunology and microbiology, national institute of allergy & infectious diseases (niaid), national institutes of health (nih), bethesda, md, usavasileios oikonomou & michail s. lionakisyou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholaryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to michail s. lionakis.the authors declare no competing interests.reprints and permissionsoikonomou, v., lionakis, m.s. extrathymic aire primes candida-specific th17 cells. nat immunol 23, 997–999 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01252-9download citationpublished: 27 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-022-01252-9anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 