evidence for at least one protein product from 80% of all mouse genes is reported in a comprehensive proteomic analysis of 41 adult mouse tissues. comparison of tissue profiles between mouse and human suggests that the fundamental biology of this important model organism is even more different from our own than we thought.you have full access to this article via your institution.as soon as the first drafts of genomes were published, scientists started wondering how many of the annotated genes produced proteins. of course, not all genes do produce proteins; some we know are only transcribed (for example, ribosomal rna genes do not produce a protein) and some probably do not even go that far. but understanding which genes produce proteins is central to a mechanistic understanding of any organism and is essential to any systems-level analysis of that organism. incremental improvements have led to a series of genome publications for both human and mouse. the most recent annotation of the human genome reports 19,969 protein-coding genes, of which 18,357 now have credible evidence supporting their existence, or about 93% of the total. this comes from an enormous amount of data compiled from many different sources1, highlighting the value of making data open and available. no other multicellular organism comes close to having this level of evidence for its proteome. even mouse, probably the most important model organism we have for understanding human health, has trailed behind. in this issue of nature methods, however, in one fell swoop, giansanti et al.2 have greatly expanded the evidence for mouse protein-coding genes (fig. 1).mouse tissues were dissected and subjected to liquid chromatography–coupled tandem mass spectrometry to compare protein expression profiles.this most current annotation of the mouse genome predicts 22,437 protein-coding genes, and the authors present evidence that 17,883 (80%) are expressed at the protein level. this represents an increase of 3,457 over where the field stood previously, a remarkably large contribution for a single study to make at this stage of maturation of the field of proteomics. the data include evidence for 1,663 splice variants of 776 genes, as well as for 712 small open reading frames that had only been identified as possibly protein coding by ribo-seq3. this tour de force involved dissecting 41 tissues from adult mice, both male and female, followed by conventional deep proteome profiling on each sample, in parallel with enrichment and analysis of phosphopeptides. the authors used a label-free approach to quantify the levels of each protein and phosphopeptide between tissues, all the while controlling for false discoveries at a 1% error rate.the authors observed approximately 5,400 proteins that were expressed across all tissues. these are presumably the core set of proteins required for the common functions of mouse cells. these core proteins also accounted for most of the protein mass in each tissue, averaging around 80%. beyond this core set, though, and in keeping with previous reports, most proteins were detectable in most tissues, albeit at widely varying levels. by contrast, less than 4% of proteins were detected in just a single tissue, which suggests that differences in gene expression alone cannot explain the functional specialization of tissues. this supports the idea that the interaction network among proteins adds the further complexity required to support the functional differences between tissues4. the authors were also able to detect at least one phosphorylation event in more than half of all proteins, sometimes with a tissue dependence and sometimes not.the depth of their data allowed the authors to explore two extremely interesting pathways to insight: (i) factors regulating protein abundance and (ii) conservation or divergence between mouse and human. to address the former, the authors extracted mrna as well from each of their tissue samples and subjected it to rna-seq. this allowed them to make a direct comparison between the levels of transcripts and proteins. unsurprisingly, at least to proteomicists, the concordance between transcript and protein levels was positive but low (r <0.5). nonetheless, mrna levels are still the best predictor of protein levels, with codon usage being a distant second, followed by mrna sequence motifs and protein–protein interactions as very poor predictors. for the latter, the authors correlated the expression of protein orthologs between mouse (from their current study) and human (from a previous study by the same group), analyzing a total of 10,869 pairs. the motivation for this analysis was to try to put some numbers on the quality of mouse as a model system for human biology. shockingly, the data tended to separate by species rather than by tissue. in other words, any given mouse tissue tended to have a more similar protein expression profile to any other mouse tissue than to its corresponding human tissue: for example, mouse thyroid was more similar to mouse urinary bladder than to human thyroid. while there is ample evidence in the literature that mice are not always a good model for understanding human biology, to see it quantified in this way makes one question one’s faith in the biomedical translation continuum.the scale of the advance in defining the mouse proteome made here is impressive, but what makes the mouse protein expression resource (http://pacific.proteomics.wzw.tum.de/) most valuable is the consistency across the samples and tissues. all the samples were treated the same way, proteins were extracted in the same way, samples were analyzed using the same system, and all data analysis was done as one. it is only this consistency, in fact, that allowed the authors to do the analyses they have done and to draw the conclusions that resulted.there is still roughly 20% of the mouse proteome for which no supporting evidence exists, although that will surely decrease in the coming years as more large-scale studies such as this are done. in fact, a large portion of this missing 20% is likely to be found in different ages and developmental stages of mice, since this study focused on adult animals. the other major gaps in proteome evidence are likely to come from proteins that are not ‘friendly’ to conventional proteomics methods (for example, those with zero or few trypsin cleavage sites or those that are very highly modified) or those of very low abundance. to the latter point, true single-cell proteomics is on the horizon now, which will allow us to detect proteins that may be expressed in only one or a few cells in the whole body. nonetheless, the study represents the single largest advance in proteome coverage of a model organism in the last decade.omenn, g. s. et al. j. proteome res. 20, 5227–5240 (2021).cas article google scholar giansanti, p. et al. nat. methods https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01526-y (2022).olexiouk, v., van criekinge, w. & menschaert, g. nucleic acids res. 46, d497–d502 (2018). d1.cas article google scholar skinnider, m. a. et al. cell 184, 4073–4089.e17 (2021).cas article google scholar download referencesthe author thanks nicholas scott for the original idea for the artwork. the author is supported by funding from genome canada (264pro, beecsi), the natural sciences and engineering research council, and the canada foundation for innovation.department of biochemistry & molecular biology, michael smith laboratories, university of british columbia, vancouver, bc, canadaleonard j. fosteryou can also search for this author in pubmed google scholarcorrespondence to leonard j. foster.the author declares no competing interests.reprints and permissionsfoster, l.j. the adult mouse proteome. nat methods 19, 792–793 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01546-8download citationpublished: 23 june 2022issue date: july 2022doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01546-8anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative 